Look, we've, uh, we, we, you are actually the first, uh,
first submitter up after we, um, we had the, uh, uh,
Cameron Brewer, uh, the other day on, uh, Thursday,
and we had the, um, the officials report.
Uh, you'll be familiar with the process.
Uh, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Uh, we've got your submission, so you can take that as read.
Um, thank you. I'll call with about four minutes to go,
but, um, uh, in your hands, uh,
and we look forward to what you've got to say.
Children's commissioner. I'm the independent statutory
advocate for all children in New Zealand under the age
of 18, and all children
and young people under the age of 25 who have been in,
or who are in the care and or custody of the state.
As, um, you said Mr.
Chair, um, I've
provided a written submission to you on the Life Jackets
for Children and Young Persons Bill, uh,
because of its importance to one
of the most basic fundamental rights of all children,
the right to life, survival
and development, which is protected by Article six
of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child
to which New Zealand is a state's party.
As children's Commissioner, one of the key issues
that I have been continually focused on
is children's safety.
So all children in our country are growing up safe and well.
I strongly commend the intention of the life jackets
for Children and Young Persons Bill,
because it is a significant step towards protecting our
country's that's children
and young people from drowning in ro in New Zealand,
which I note is a highly preventable cause of death.
It's always good to see proposed legislation coming
before the Parliament that is child and youth focused,
and which seeks to uphold their rights in action,
translating positively
and directly into their everyday lives and experiences.
I'm of the view furthermore,
that this bill presents a significant opportunity
to prevent the deaths of family
and whanau members of parents, grandparents, uncles, aunts,
cousins, and friends, people who are important in the lives
of children and young people, so
that this bill has the widest possible impact, uh,
that it can form Moana and their families.
And Hanau, I advocate to you as members
of the Select committee to report back to the house
recommending that the provisions of this bill are widened
and simplified so that it applies
to all children under the age
of 18 when they are on all recreational craft
and to all adults as well.
I note that very similar calls have been made
by Water Safety New Zealand,
our country's National Water Safety Sector
Leadership Organization.
That organization has noted in its submission
to this committee that if the provisions
of the bill are widened in this way
and simplified, this could be,
and I quote, water Safety New Zealand,
the most influential piece
of drowning prevention legislation since New Zealand
courageously introduce pool fencing rules
that reduce child drowning by 80%.
So as children's Commissioner, I'd like to further emphasize
to you today why this bill is so important.
What the reality is
that water related accidents are a key threat
to children's life survival
and development in alt in New Zealand.
As a small island nation, the majority
of Moana in our country spend their lives close
to the ocean, and I note that for Moana Maori,
the indigenous children of our nation, they hold deep ties
to the Moana as well as to our and rivers and lakes.
I also note the deep connection of Moana Pacifica to
Tewa the Pacific Ocean and to their identity.
Historically in New Zealand, drowning was the leading cause
of preventable death and toddlers in our country.
However, as a nation,
we have made significant progress on reducing drownings
among children and young people due to intentional policies
that have prioritized safety, including of children
and young people such as pool, fencing, regulation,
and water safety education initiatives.
These policies
and initiatives continue to be crucial to maintain
for the benefit of Moana and for their families.
And while this progress is commendable,
Moana are still drowning in al New Zealand,
and it remains a key cause
of preventable death amongst children.
Too many Moana are also losing their parents, caregivers
and family members to drowning.
I wish to acknowledge the significant
increase in drownings over the summer
and the devastating impacts that this has on
so many families and farm, including on Moana,
who have experienced the death of a loved one, such
as a parent or grandparent from drowning.
Our high rates of drowning this summer bring the purpose
of this bill into even sharper focus
and highlight the urgency of practical policy measures
that can prevent more drownings on our oceans, lakes,
rivers, and waterways.
So please take up the opportunity that you have
as the select committee to strengthen the bill
to better protect children, young people,
their family, and whanau members.
Considering that all children have the right
to life survival and development
and noting their particular vulnerability
to drowning when they're out on the water.
I believe all children
and young people should be required to,
to wear life jackets on all recreational
craft, as should all adults.
So I therefore am recommending to you
that the bill is strengthened
to make life jackets compulsory
for all children under 18 years of age,
not just those under the age of 15,
and to require children
to wear a life jacket on all recreational craft,
not just recreational crafts that are less, uh,
six meters or less.
We've got four minutes left.
I also recommend to you that the bill is strengthened
to require everyone, both children
and adults to wear a life jacket
when they're out on the water.
This will ensure that young people, um, 18 years
and over are also protected,
and that more people, um, more children than young people,
sorry, are protected from the devastating impact
of losing a loved one to drown in making this change so
that the bill covers all people
will simplify this legislation to make it crystal clear
what the requirements are, making it easier for families
of hanau to understand and put into action.
I believe that this will make a difference in practice.
Thank you. Finally, uh, I wish to make mention
of the importance of protecting children
and young people from drowning in other ways.
And so whilst, um, outside the scope of this bill, I do want
to bring to your attention to other
issues that are relevant,
Clear. What I'm gonna do, because
if we go to that,
we're gonna run outta time for questions.
Oh, okay. And so most useful for us
to actually focus on this bill as opposed
to things which are definitely outta scope,
which you've all said that those are.
So with your forbearance, thank you,
we ask some questions, it'd be great.
And if we go Okay, sure. We'll go back to that.
Um, so colleagues questions, um,
because I'm gonna ask one right up front, um,
which was just wanted, um, clear, could you just tell us,
there are vast range of different sorts
of recreational boating.
Uh, what is a boat, what's a recreational craft, et cetera.
Um, how much, uh,
knowledge is within the commission about those different
sorts of, um, recreational craft, uh, that there are
and recreational activities that there are on those craft?
Because potentially, for example, some, like, I'll take a,
so a surfboard for example, if we went down
what you're suggesting, we would require, um, surfers
to wear a life jacket, and I'm not sure that
that would be quite within the usual activities of a,
a surfer or people fishing, for example, um,
in a boat which could actually constrain their ability
to do the, um, uh, to, to perform the activity.
Wind surfing would be another one, for example. Mm-hmm.
Interested in your feedback?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate that question.
And, um, there are others who are far more qualified than me
to advise, um, on that.
Um, from my perspective in terms of, you know,
the protection of, um, children
and young people on the water, uh, I come back
to the principle of, you know,
what will best protect their safety?
Um, so I understand that there will be some nuance
that has to be worked through.
Um, and we wouldn't want sort
of unintended consequences like you talk about around,
you know, surface suddenly having to, um,
be wearing life jackets.
However, doesn't mean it
Doesn't mean all. Then
There may be a strong argument, for example, that when,
um, children and young people are learning to surf, um,
that it might be quite an important, um, thing for them
to actually have a life jacket on, um, to start with.
But, um, yeah, I, I guess that's something
that we'll need to be worked through. Yes.
Cool. Thank you. Okay, other questions?
I don't see any others, but I will
ask, so I'll ask one other one.
Um, life. One of the things which we've had drawn
to our attention difference between life jacket
and personal flotation device,
and again, that goes to what's the most appropriate, um,
thing to wear, uh, in different situations, you know,
doing different, uh, different forms of recreation.
Any, uh, comment on that? Um, Claire,
Based on the research that I am familiar with, uh,
life jackets are proven to save lives.
Um, and I think that's why it's really important
that this bill is squarely focused on with jackets.
Okay, cool. I think we are done with questions.
We're almost done with time as well,
Claire, really appreciate it. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. Lovely. Thank you.
Okay, um, next up we've got Sam, uh,
Newton Recreational Recreation, Alara.
Sam, welcome.
Can I testing my audio? Is that okay?
Yep. No, that's all good.
So again, if you can take the, um, submission as read,
um, uh, we've got 10 minutes.
Uh, I'll give you a call at four if, um, you're still going
with presentation, we do notwithstanding
or try to coax questions out
of the committee that particular time.
We do, uh, do generally like asking some questions.
So in your hands,
I am the advocacy manager at Recreation RTRO.
We are the professional association
and peak industry body that seeks
and works towards providing leadership advocacy
and professional development opportunities
for those in the recreation sector.
Uh, membership is about 5,000 strong includes, uh,
policy makers, um, various, uh,
territorial local authorities, council staff
and councils themselves, voluntary organizations,
regional sports trusts and outdoor
recreation providers and many others.
We, um, a specific subset
of our membership is aquatic facility workers,
ranging from the lifeguards, uh, on pool side right through
to the management and governance, uh, of aquatic facilities,
largely owned by councils.
Sometimes the management of those places
and spaces are outsourced to private, um,
management, as you probably know.
Yes, chair. Um, we view the proposed bill as positive
and necessary step.
However, we believe this bill presents the biggest drowning
prevention opportunity and a generation
and must be strengthened
to achieve a much greater impact on saving lives.
We support the views
and recommendations put forward by Water Safety New Zealand
and Coast Guard New Zealand,
and we note that their analysis shows that an average
of 12 lives could be saved every year if everyone on a
craft wore a life jacket.
Statistics show that adults, particularly men over 40,
make up the majority of watercraft fatalities to
genuinely reduced Brownings.
Mandatory life jacket use must extend beyond children
into adult and the universal, we recommend
that the bill be extended to apply
to all people on all recreational craft.
Mandatory use must apply to all recreational craft craft,
regardless of size to increase survivability
and provide consistency.
We use, uh, data, uh, participation data
and our understanding of physical activity in New Zealand
via the act of New Zealand survey, uh,
which is conducted annually
by Sport New Zealand Crown Agency, uh, which so doesn't, uh,
show boating or include boating as a specific form
of physical activity,
but it does include kayaking, uh, canoeing as one category,
uh, fishing, uh, swimming, et cetera, et cetera.
Um, fishing
and canoeing, kayaking,
canoeing slash kayaking are on the top 10 forms
of physical activity, uh, for both, uh, tam
Ranta and adults.
And participation of those activities could, we could infer
that, uh, a lot of that incurs in a boat, certainly kayaking
and, um, canoeing,
but also probably some fishing and maybe some swimming.
Um, so boating is a really common form
of recreational activity.
We know the drowning statistics.
We know that the problem just isn't, well,
it largely isn't children, um, drowning off boats.
It's largely adults. And these, these, these inform those,
those perspectives and that data informs our submission.
We need one simple, easy to follow national rule
that removes confusion
and helps everyone to make the right decision.
We urge the select committee to use this opportunity
to implement a robust solution
that will maximize lifesaving opportunities.
So that's universalizing life jacket use across all age
groups and enlarging the, um, the both sides.
Happy to take any questions on that?
Thank you very much, Sam.
I'll just see what questions there are.
See a very quiet committee at the moment. It's very unusual.
Oh, Tracy, sorry.
I've got a Google toggle across
to find out who's actually got the hands up.
Uh, Tracy and then Julianne.
Thank you Mr. Chair. And, um, thank you Sam.
That's really, um, interesting.
Um, I'm particularly sort of exercised by this concept of,
of, of, um, extending the scope
and the universality involved because, um,
and you may be aware, and I'm asking this question
to see if you are, you can point me in the right direction.
Um, you know, when you create a difficult situation for
raw followers that sometimes it can make things
worse rather than better.
And hence the fact that, um, I'm assuming that's
where the call to to, to broaden the scope comes from,
which I kind of agree with.
I think, you know, this is a really good opportunity to do
a kind of a one and done and and, and do it properly.
Um, is there any research in, in, um,
in the fields that you are aware of that when you sort of,
you make one change
but it's not quite enough, it can sort of negatively impact
the rest of the, the population that's,
or the rest of the cohorts that aren't included?
Uh, no, no, I'm not aware of any, um,
research specifically, I'd defer to both water safety
and Coast Guard who are expert in these realms
and they have made their, um, views quite clear.
Uh, it is middle-aged white guys like me
who own a small boat less than six meters
that are the problem around, uh, drowning,
preventable drowning, uh, and life jacket use.
Um, so, uh, uh, for us it makes, uh, sense
to broaden that out.
Thank you. Um, Julianne,
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, would you say it's like comparable to
the rules requiring people
to wear a driver's license when in a motor vehicle?
Um, in that, the point of the rule isn't
that we might be able to perfectly enforce it,
but that, um, it will shift the culture.
Yeah, I, um, I would delink enforcements a,
a lot of rules and regulations are unenforced
and unenforceable or difficult to enforce.
That doesn't mean that, um, those rules,
rules speculations should have been in place.
Question from me. Don't see any more hands up.
I'm just, we, we had some, um, uh,
discussion about what is a recreational craft, um,
what is a life jacket versus a flotation device.
And, um, you've probably heard a little bit of
that question in the last, uh, submission about nuance,
about are there some activities where in fact, um, a
life jacket will be, um, a significant impediment
to actually carrying out the activity.
Uh, and then of course this on, if you're on a craft,
particularly let's say you're on, on a boat
and you're sleeping on a boat, for example, most
of us probably aren't gonna wanna sleep in a life jacket.
Yeah. So we have to get common sense around here.
And that might emerge in, um, the, you know,
those issues might be present in the
regulatory impact statements, especially that, um,
PFD versus life jacket one
because there is PFD does exist as a term in other parts
of law and regulation.
Um, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, for every technical problem I imagine
there's a technical solution.
Um, there might be some minor exemptions,
there'd be some common sense, um, stuff applied there.
Okay. Um, but that shouldn't distract us from the
opportunity to, um, hit, hit the problem where it needs
to be hit, which is, um, which is not just children.
Okay. Look, thank you. Really appreciate that.
I don't see any other questions.
So, um, Sam, thank you very much.
Really appreciate and thank you for the work you do. Thank
You.
Right. That takes us to social justice,
uh, as Jackie
and Cam, if you wanna ask any questions, do feel free
to, to chip in.
Jonathan, we've got, um, Jackie,
Uh, we'll just need Jackie to accept the promotion invite.
Okay. She should be coming through an hour.
Well, Jackie,
we got the ed. Yes.
Hi, Andy. Jackie. Hi.
Nice to see you. Nice to see you.
Right. I, although having said
that, I can't actually see you all.
I've got as a blank screen. Oh
No.
And now you've muted yourself.
Okay.
You there Jackie? If you can, if you can get the, uh,
the video on, that'd be great.
Um,
otherwise
Continue with camera.
Camera, Right there I am.
Oh, brilliant. Well done. Well done. Okay. Right.
We've got your, uh, submission so you can take that as read.
Um, if you want to, um,
highlight any particular elements, that's great.
Uh, we do like asking questions.
Um, so I'll give you, we've got you for 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call at four, um,
just in case you're still, if you're still going.
Um, and then, um, we will, uh,
uh, we'll conclude at 10 minutes.
So, um, time is yours.
Thank you so much, te Koto
and thank you for the opportunity for me to speak today.
I speak on behalf of social justice OT
to express strong support for the spill
and to urge the committee to strengthen it.
Manda mandating life jackets
for children under 15 on small recreational craft is a vital
step, but it does not go far enough.
If we want to prevent avoidable deaths on our waterways,
we must extend this requirement
to everyone on vessels under six.
Not a matter of it is a matter of
the evidence is stark.
According to water safety New Zealand,
more than 800 people have drowned.
In the past decade, 97% of those,
those victims were age 15
or over in boating related drownings,
94% were not wearing life jackets.
So while protecting children is essential,
the current bull leaves the vast majority of those at risk
adults outside the law's protection.
And we all know the reality when a small boat capsizes,
when someone slips overboard while fishing,
when weather turns faster than unexpected, there is no time
to put a life jacket on.
The only life jacket
that saves you is the one you are already wearing.
The bull correctly focuses on vessels under six meters.
These boats are the most likely to capsize,
often operated by inexperienced skippers
or tourists, commonly used for fishing.
Where falls overboard are frequent
and res re response time is minimal.
These are precisely the situations where a universal
life jacket rule saves lives.
New Zealand is behind comparable compatible jurisdictions.
Victoria mandates life jackets to,
for all occupants on vessels under 4.8 meters.
Canada and the United States have extensive requirements
for life jacket wear on small craft
extending this bill aligns us with global best practice
and with the recommendations of water safety New Zealand,
coast Guard, New Zealand, and Maritime New Zealand.
A universal rule is simple, better law.
It is easier to enforce no age checks,
no judgment calls.
It is clearer for the public, one rule for all.
It is more equitable.
Every life is protected, not just those under 15.
We don't ask police to guess a child's age
before enforcing seatbelt laws.
We shouldn't do it on the water either.
Every year, families lose loved ones
to preventable drownings.
These are not abstract statistics.
They're parents, grandparents, uncles and mates.
Communities grieve
and they grieve knowing that a simple, inexpensive piece
of equipment could have saved a life.
This bill is not about government overreach.
It is about evidence-based prevention.
It is about setting a clear standard
that keeps people alive.
At first Reading Act,
MP Cameron Luxon suggested this bill is
a solution in search of a problem
because only one child would have been affected over the
past decade with respect,
that argument misses the point entirely, not the fact
that a child drowned
after removing a life jacket with the skipper's.
Permission is not an argument against regulation is the,
it is the clearest possible argument for it.
It shows exactly why voluntary compliance fails
and why clear enforcement rules are needed.
We don't rely on parental discretion for seat belt
or bike helmets.
We shouldn't rely on it for life jackets
and high risk vessels.
The bill does not criminalize parenting.
It standardizes safety. It does not remove freedom.
It protects life.
Social justice urges the committee to support the bill's.
Current provisions for mandatory life jacket wear
for under 15 amend the bill
to extend this requirement
to all persons on recreational craft under six meters,
retain existing exemptions for supervised water sports
surfboards and commercial rafting.
This bull is a strong start, but we have the opportunity
and the responsibility to finish the job.
A life jacket rule
that protects our only children leaves most
of those at risk.
Unprotected. A universal rule protects everyone.
It is simple, fair, enforceable, and proven to save lives.
Let's not wait for another preventable tragedy.
Let's set one clear standard
that keeps every new Zealander safe on the water.
Thank you Jackie. Very much appreciated.
Um, just check to see what questions we've got, um,
from committee members.
Sorry, I've got, do my toggling again. Okay.
I've got Simon and Julianne.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you, Jackie.
You raise a good point, uh, in your submission,
but I'm wondering, does social justice Riah have an opinion
on the hundreds of other people who drown,
who are not on a recreation watercraft,
who might have been fishing, waiting, simply
don't know how to swim
or get themselves into a situation
where they're not confident and they panic and drown.
But what, how do you think
with thinking about reducing the risk of death
or serious harm on the water, um,
how do you think we might address that risk?
So what we're talking today about is life jacket spill,
um, people wearing life jacket to save lives.
That's what we're here to talk about today.
Um, I'm not, um, talking about those
that are actually doing,
are you talking about water activities without
life jackets on?
Is that what you are sort of looking for, Simon?
Yeah, well, the vast bulk of people
who have drowned in the last 10 years
or so, you know, from the records I have about 650, um,
have not drowned off a boat.
They've drowned from entering the water, um,
and then either being sucked out or being overcome
or being unable to swim.
So yeah, I know you, you, you've raised the issue of of,
you know, if we could save one life, it would be worth it.
But, um, we're thinking about targeting public policy
and legislation and enforcement
to the best possible outcome.
Do you think that chasing down the risk
of potentially saving one life every 10 years versus say the
650 people who drowned, um, who entered the water
and didn't come out in the last 10 years, uh,
do you think there's something else
that we could be focusing on?
Absolutely not. I think that this is a crucial part
of the water sector and I think that you will have
after myself, um, those
and within the water safety sector
that will know their statistics.
And I think that's what we need to,
or you guys need to actually remember
that these guys have been in the
industry for a very long time.
Um, I've had a little bit of experience
because actually it's in my, um, I've actually got my own,
um, uh, uh, business as well and water safety and,
and swimming within these in, in Auckland.
So I'm very, very clear on, uh, these legislations.
And I think it's absolutely important
that we do not get on the wrong path here, Simon,
about we can actually go into talking about lots
of discussions about drownings,
but I think that we need to bring it back to the very basics
of the, um, yeah.
Uh, you'll hear that from water Safety New Zealand
and the boating people that will know, uh,
more statistics than I have done.
Yeah. Thanks. I'll take, um, Julianne,
Joanna, and Jackie, thank you so much for your submission.
Um, already today we've heard from two other submitters
who argued like you for broader application of the rule
to all people, not just children, also adults.
Um, but they also seem to indicate
that it should be on all recreational
vessels or all vessels.
So just wondering if you had any comment on that
that was recreation ROA and the children's commissioner?
Oh, look, absolutely.
I think that it's important that we, when, when,
when you say all vessels, um, I think
that the boating will come today, I think you'll need
to talk to more experienced people on that, that sector.
But I do believe that, um,
the life jacket spill was so important.
I've done my statistics over the years while I've been in
the, um, sector for since 2007, um,
since I started my founding, my, my business.
So I think it's important that, um, I, I,
so I go into schools and utilize school pools
to actually get kids aware of water safety.
Um, and I know the statistics,
I'm always doing the research, um, as well.
So yeah.
Okay. I think that takes us to,
I've got about 20 odd seconds left.
Um, I think that's all the question,
um, that have been asked.
So look, thank you. That was, uh, very clear
and um, we appreciate your contribution of the work you do.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Right. Okay.
Um, now we've got, uh, Craig Davis.
Uh, Craig isn't online,
but we have Peter Allen ready to go.
Oh, Peter Allen. I heard it was James.
Oh, James. Allen. Sorry. James. Right. Okay. Right.
Cool. Okay, well let's get James up
and if, um, Craig turns up the next few minutes, then we'll,
we'll, um, we'll put uh, him on next.
Okay.
We've got James up now.
Am I here? Hello?
Hear you. Yep. Can hear you. Can't see you yet, James.
Yeah,
The wheels are turning slightly. Oh,
There we go. Good. Got
you now, right James, you can take your submission
as read, um, but if you wanna highlight any particular
items, we've got you down for five minutes.
I'll give you a call with two to go
and, um, your time starts now.
Okay. Excellent. Q everyone, my name is James er,
thank you for the opportunity of making
this oral submission.
Just to give you a little bit of background about myself,
um, I've come from quite an extensive, uh,
on water practical sort of background.
So a lot of my stuff is anecdotal.
Um, I worked to dive as well training
and guiding travel for scuba divers.
I've worked at Victoria University Marine Laboratory
as their boating and safety officer to train
and support masters and PhD level students operate vessels
and to manage their volunteers safely.
I've also worked at Ocean Sports
and Wellington train students through, um, school students
through the adults in Ilbo,
sailing in RYA POWERBOAT training.
That's Royal, um, hoing Association.
I'm currently a harbor ranger
for the Wellington Harbor Masters office, where I monitor,
educate, and very rarely infringe small boat
operators for dangerous behavior.
So my submission is I support the compulsory wearing
of life jackets for all age groups, not just 15 years
and under for vessels under six meters.
And that is when they are underway,
not necessarily making way in,
which probably answers your question originally Andy,
about if they're at anchor, uh,
or they're tied to assure there's not a
requirement to wear a life jacket.
Um, I'll just give you a scenario.
Whilst I was out on patrol a couple of years ago,
we did a compliance check
for a life jacket on a small runabout with two POB.
That persons on board.
We asked them to prove they had enough life jackets on board
'cause that was the bylaw at that stage.
They presented three life jackets
and then they were on their way only for the larger
of the two passengers to drown within the next two hours.
He was unable to put a life jacket on,
either it had been lost, it was too small,
or it was just too difficult.
He was carrying a reasonable amount of body fat.
So whilst he couldn't sink, he exhausted himself
around two hours trying to stay upright, shouting
and screaming to people on shore.
They likely, he likely inhaled salt water
and suffered cardiac arrest.
The vessel in question was an open dingy
with a tele steer outboard.
And these people are at great risk if people wear them
before they leave them on the dock,
before they leave the dock.
They have time to determine the correct fit,
ensure they have the correct number of life jackets
for everybody on board.
Quite often people grab a pile of life jackets
and they, you know, you've got a guy that's six foot
and he's, he's got a kid's life jacket to put on that.
These are very common issues, wrong sizes, incorrect number
of life jackets and incorrect number of life jackets,
and storing them in easily accessible places.
They've got them stuffed somewhere up
under a bunk at the front.
Scenario two, the attitudes of a significant part
of X generation
and the boom is, I guess is not to wear a life jacket.
It should like seat belts.
I've personally witnessed an X Coast Guard
skipper telling someone that they don't have
to wear a life jacket when they're about to put one on,
on a small private vessel. We've
Got a couple of minutes left, um, James,
but, um, carry on.
So they changed their mind.
The pros for inflatable jackets are, they're so comfortable,
people forget to put them on.
They're slimming and people won't generally overheat
as they cover very little
of their body Cons about inflatable life jackets, uh,
inflatable life jackets and mobile phones sink if not worn.
So inflatable jackets require annual
maintenance and ongoing care.
The idea is I'll grab it if I need it
and it just doesn't work.
Inflatable life jackets
and near impossible for the average
person to put on in the water.
And honestly, people who had trouble putting them on,
on dry land, likely through a lack of practice.
We need to change a generation.
Everybody has a part to play.
We need to role model life jacket use, just make it fit.
We don't want it to become a right of passage
for somebody at 16 years.
I can get my driver license now, dad
and I can also take my life jacket off just to be like you.
We don't want to see kids,
see their parents drown, washed out on the water.
Let's do the right thing. Make it
consistent across the country.
Make a simple rule that everybody abides by young or old.
Thank you very much, James. We've
got about 45 seconds left.
Um, anybody you've got any questions?
Look, James, can I just ask one, um, you,
'cause you obviously had a lot of experience in various
different, um, water recreational activities.
Are there nuances in here about some, um, uh, some forms
of activity, different sorts of, you know, with surfing, um,
wind surfing, whatever it might be,
where either a life jacket is, is not, um,
a would be worn, um, easily and still perform the activity
or, uh, that A PFD might be a better bet in some cases?
Well, or in fact in some cases it's um, it's, it's um, um,
um, what do you call 'em?
Water suits, wetsuits,
Wetsuit, yes. Yeah,
so, so we allow wetsuits are a replacement,
a full dive suit is a, is a replacement for a life jacket.
So PFD life jacket, they're all kind of quite, um,
overreaching sort of names.
But anything that helps if somebody float
that's been standardized to an Australian
or New Zealand, um, standard, then that's great.
I mean, there are all sorts of alternatives
to people when you're on standup paddleboard.
You can have belt type pfd,
so there's merely just a slim line belt that goes
around your waist that inflates, you know,
you go on a a surfboard.
Um, we don't want to impose on those people,
but it's definitely wearing a, you know, a full, full, um,
arm and leg, um, wetsuit, you know,
three five mil certainly gives some buoyancy
to help somebody float.
So, so there's some nuance in this as to effectively
what you are arguing for is not necessarily everybody
wearing a life jacket, but everybody wearing one form
or other of, um, buoyancy, um,
device device when they're using a, um,
a vessel of some sort. Is that what you're arguing? Well,
Any type of vessel they need to wear a a life jacket and,
and that is, comes under the heading
of a p ft PFT is covers life,
jackets, CIAs, all sorts of things.
But, um, yeah, so I advocate that they wear those.
But when you were asking about surfing and swimming
and fishing, yeah, there are other alternatives
that they could be using and they would be
Okay. I'm
not going down that line of wanting to put
that into law, but, uh, you know, we, we, um, pick off
what we can whilst we can.
It's not uncommon for people to take gear out in a boat.
It's pretty easy to store it. It's not a hindrance to them.
So let's, let's get this one across the line.
Okay, James, thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
No, my pleasure.
Okay, now we've got drowning prevention Auckland,
and I think it's Nicola.
Is that right?
Hi Nicola.
Hi Kiara. Welcome. Oh, we can see you now, right?
Beautiful background you've got there too.
Bring the water to the committee.
Very, very nice. Look,
we've got you down, we've got your submission.
Uh, you can take that as read.
Um, you've got 10 minutes if, uh, you want
to leave some time for questions, we appreciate that.
Um, I'll give you a call with four minutes to go.
And hi Theresa as well. Um, uh, and your time starts now.
And thank you very much for the opportunity
to address the committee this afternoon.
My name is Nicola King Gellar, chief Executive
of Drowning Prevention Auckland.
We are a charity solely focused on drowning prevention
and for 31 years we have been providing research, education
and advocacy across the Auckland region.
We also do consultancy work outside of Auckland
with councils and landowners, uh, on how
to improve water safety in their places and spaces.
With me today is Dr. Theresa Stanley,
our research and impact manager.
Theresa recently completed her PhD investigating the gaps
between the water comp competencies of
what adults think they can do
and what they can actually do in open water.
We will focus on that aspect of our submission today.
We strongly support this Bill's intent,
but we urge the committee to strengthen it so
that life jackets a mandatory for all people
on all recreational vessels where
whenever the vessel is underway, we align fully
with Coast Guard Toki, Moana, and Water Safety New Zealand.
In this recommendation, we expect you'll hear later today,
there are arguments of around over 300 plus boaties,
predominantly aged over 15 years,
not wearing a life jacket who have drowned.
In the last 25 years,
LAX national legislation has seen the introduction
of a mixture of bylaw legislation across the country,
creating further inconsistency and confusion.
The current maritime rule 91 legislation says
that life jackets must be carried
and worn at times of heightened risk.
That is the core problem.
Assessment of competency and risk is highly subjective.
Decades of drowning prevention evidence shows
that people overestimate their competence
and underestimate risk.
In Dr. Stanley's research,
most adults thought they were good at floating
and swimming while 91% believed they could float.
In reality, 60% could not float for even one minute
and almost none could sustain floating long enough
to survive in open water.
More than half thought they were good swimmers.
However, four out
of five participants could not swim more than a hundred
meters in open water.
That is the reality.
People don't wear a life jacket
because they underestimate the risk
and they expect to be able
to save themselves if they do end up in the water.
But in most cases, without immediate rescue, they cannot,
most fatalities happen suddenly, often close to shore
with no time to put a life jacket on.
This bill cannot rely on skipper judgment
because skippers are subject to the same overconfidence
and risk underestimation as everyone else,
including their own competence.
As a skipper drowning prevention Auckland urges the
Transport and Infrastructure Committee
to extend the proposed bill to cover all ages
and all recreational vessels to have the best opportunity
to prevent avoidable deaths.
The evidence shows that drowning prevention policy must
account for human limitations, not assume perfect judgment.
Mandatory life jacket wearing while underway is the
simplest, most effective way to save lives
if the vessel is moving.
Life jackets are on. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that.
Um, Nicola, and, um, you have, just in terms of questions,
you did make one particular point there,
which was about while underway.
So can you just tease that out a little bit?
'cause we certainly had, um, people saying, well, you know,
if you are, um, in a, in a vessel
and you are, uh, for example, you are sleeping
or your, um, it's you, you know, eating
or whatever it might be at, uh, in the evening,
you're probably not particularly gonna be
want to be wearing a life jacket.
Yeah.
So we support very limited discretion only in clearly safe
circumstances such as when the vessel is anchored or maed
or passengers are sleeping,
but underway, the default must be wearing
emergencies happen too quickly
for discretionary judgment to be reliable.
Okay. And the other, the other issue which has been raised
is, is different types of, um, flotation devices.
I mean, life jacket is, is a different thing than a,
it's a subset of PFD.
Um, but also you've got, um, some recreational activities
where a vessel in inverted commas is, um, uh, you know,
obviously requires a degree of flexibility to use, you know,
I think of windsurf or, um, uh, or, um, surfing
or, um, in particular, uh, where a life jacket,
I don't think I've ever seen anybody
wear a life jacket surfing.
I I'm gonna jump in and answer that one if I may.
Um, so, so A PFD covers all sorts
of life jackets, buoyancy aids.
Mm-hmm. And we've been a little bit lax about our
terminology of life jackets and that probably I'm,
That's why I'm asking.
So absolutely.
Um, PFD covers some of those instances,
the specialist paddle buoyancy aids
and that aren't life jackets
but should be covered in this legislation.
So to say life jackets should be worn
by all people on boats is great craft.
You probably need to be a little bit clearer about what type
of PFD should be worn.
We're certainly not advocating that surfboards are a craft
standup paddle boards in the surf, uh, life jackets
or PFDs generally aren't recommended
in the surf zone either.
Um, so so what you're saying is, sorry, um, colleagues
to monopolize this, but what you're saying is
that some things like a surfboard is not a
vessel in your terms.
So we've gotta be clear about both what a, uh,
a life jacket is, what A PFD is,
but also what a vessel is, correct?
Yes. So, so a surfboard isn't a vessel.
Um, it does get a little bit gray.
A standup paddleboard can be a craft,
but when it is used
as a surfboard in the surf zone, it isn't
Right.
Okay. Clearly got some more thinking
to do there, colleagues.
Um, any other questions?
I'll just check to see if I can see anybody on this.
Yes, flicking around.
Okay, we'll go for, I'll go for the sponsor
of the bill first, uh, camera
and then Carlos,
you are on mute cam.
No, you're still on mute. No, can't hear you.
You, you sort, you sort that out.
I've got Carlos, if you can sort
that out, then I'll come back to you. Yes.
I would like to see some advice from LER
and, uh, ul, um, about the type
of life jacket been included in this bill
because we know that, um, one of the definition
of life jackets including top 4 0 1, 4, 0 2, and 4 0 3,
and five and six, right.
There's a, there's a few have been included.
So in case of accident,
do you think young children actually will become enough
or have the ability to manually pull the court
to inflate the life jacket?
Um, there have been instances
where people have not been able
to manually inflate a life jacket.
So yes, that is a concern.
There haven't been a lot, but there have been instances
of fatalities where that's occurred.
Um, one that I know of from a boat
and one from a, from fishing off the rocks
where they've had clothing over top of the life jacket.
Um, so whether that should come in,
that's really not for me.
To, to clarify whether that should
or shouldn't come into the, into the definition
of a life jacket or not at the, at the,
at the moment it is currently, um, classified as,
as a life jacket enabled to be worn,
Or do you recommend that
because this bill is specific for young people, people
or maybe only including a specific type
of life jacket being used?
I think there are advantages to allowing the, um,
inflatable jackets on boats.
A lot of people prefer them.
If they prefer them, they're going to wear them.
The inflatable jackets are quite different to inflatable
waistbands and things.
Inflatable jackets are designed to keep your airways up
and out of the water and, um, you,
so so I think that that clarification should be made.
Um, yes, I i if it makes, if it allows people
and, and encourages people to wear life jackets more,
then that's a good thing.
Okay. I've got a camera, if you can
get the system work there.
Can you hear me now? Loud and clear.
Okay. Thank you. And thank you Nicola
and Theresa for your ad strong advocacy.
Just noting that you're, uh, drowning prevention Auckland.
Are you able just to touch on the challenges
that new migrants new New Zealanders bring to your efforts
around drowning prevention?
We have a significant focus on new settler communities.
Uh, they have a layer
of protection when they first arrive in New Zealand, uh,
because they're busy settling and focused on other things.
However, after about the seven month mark,
they are venturing out
and they are unaware of the dangers of our waterways.
Uh, many come from landlocked countries
that just have no experience of
what it's like in waterways such as ours
that are dynamic and forever changing.
Uh, we do have life jacket hubs across Auckland, uh,
that provide access to life jackets to communities
that may not be able to afford them.
Um, they are a high price point,
particularly if you are not
regularly engaging in that activity.
Uh, last year we had over 30,000 life jackets utilized.
Um, does that answer your question, Cameron?
That's very good. Look, thank you very much.
Our, um, our time has expired, I think from
what you were saying, but what some others are saying is
we're gonna have to make sure that we have the technical
advice and understanding the standards
and all those sort of things as to what's appropriate where.
Yes. Thank you very much.
Opportunity to present. Thank you very
Much. Okay, now Fish
and Games next. Richie,
we've got Richie there.
Hopefully you, uh
Oh, I can see you. Oh,
I can see you a blank screen. Anyway,
I'll just, uh, try.
There, there we go. Sorry.
Apologies for the technical pitch there.
Good to see you again, Richard. Um,
Uh, you too. Hope you're well.
Yes, indeed, indeed. Um,
so we have your submission in writing so you can
just feel free to highlight what you wanna highlight.
Um, you've got 10 minutes.
Um, I'll give you a call at four if there's,
if you're still going, just
'cause we do like to ask a few questions.
So, um, in your hands.
Cool. I'm Richie Cosgrove.
I'm the Chief Operating Officer
for Fish and Game New Zealand.
Um, thank you very much for the opportunity
to present to the committee today.
Um, we certainly much appreciate that.
So fish and Game, we, uh,
basically represent freshwater anglers
and water users, so we're not talking
about anything in the ocean.
Um, marine boundaries, those sorts of things.
So our sort of, uh, focus is basically inland rivers
and lakes and we've sort of, um, picked up on a,
um, a little issue in there.
And that's the while underway definition.
So a lot of our anglers
or that would, would do what we call drifting fishing
or they would use, um,
and this is probably a tricky technical one for you,
is they, uh, they'd use an electric, uh, mooring system.
So that is where they would use a device.
Um, there's a common brand called Min Cota,
and that would is where you would GPS lock yourself on a
position, and that's generally over a depression
or in the lake so that you can fish over there.
And technically that would meet your definition of underway
'cause that GPS unit is a power supply.
It's an electric motor
that's keeping you in exactly the same place,
but you're actually more stable than you would probably ever
be with a physical anchor.
So, um, we just wanted to highlight that largely,
but we support the intent of the bill
and we would be also comfortable, um, if all vessel,
all vessels under six meters had everyone wearing a life
jacket while underway.
It's just that underway.
And we're looking, um, to, for you
to consider whether you exclude those activities of,
you know, drift fishing, use
of electric anchoring or trolling.
Is is the other one, sort of under two, two knots,
but happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Richie. Um,
and, uh, some of us have, uh, ha have enjoyed, uh, some of,
uh, some time with fish and games.
So some of those, uh, techniques are now familiar.
If, uh, if any expertly, um, questions colleagues
look c can Richard, can I ask one then,
because just you, you've raised that, you know, you,
you were trolling two, two knots, et cetera,
so we're going very, very slowly in this situation.
Yeah, yeah. Um,
and how much of an impediment in,
into actually doing the fishing
in these circumstances would a life jacket be?
It would be, I suppose, typically dependent on, um,
what the type of life jacket is and,
and what you're doing at that time.
If you're just sitting there as the boats trolling a life
jacket, it's not gonna be any impediment of the all,
but if it's it's handling fish
or dealing with getting the fish out of the water,
then um, then it could be.
Um, but yeah, it's, it's a low, those sorts of activities,
we, we sort of think of a low risk activities,
But if you were required to have a life jacket, then
that will be an impediment in that situation. So
Yeah, we, we sort of had
that discussion internally within our own fish
and game, uh, regional councils and that,
and yeah, that was the, the,
our biggest boating region is the eastern region.
And, and that was one thing
that they said might be an impediment
to people taking this up, and that's why they sort of, um,
and we support the, uh, two knots sort of limit.
So if you're going slower than that,
Yeah. And the,
would there be not,
would there not be a challenge in trying
to work out whether you're doing two knots or not?
I mean, I know it's obviously it's very, very slow,
but, um, it's just something you'd have
to rely on people's judgment that yes,
they're going very slowly if that was the rule.
Yeah. Well underway also would consider them drifting.
So if you're just drifting in the middle of the lake,
I mean, you're underway in the sense that you're floating
and you're being probably pushed along by the wind.
You're not using motor power.
Okay. Cool. Thank you Julianne.
Thanks so much for your submission. Richie.
We've heard a lot of submissions today, um, arguing
that the committee should extend the bill
to make it compulsory for all people, not just children
and, um, on all vessels, a lot of them, um,
that are recreational once they're underway.
Um, and I guess, um, I guess my question would be like,
what would your position be on that?
Or we're totally comfortable. Yeah, yeah. You know, and,
Um, I guess the, with, so the, the substance of the,
um, submission is really just saying
that maybe there's some instances that shouldn't count
as underway, that might mm-hmm.
Yeah. But would there be a risk of, um,
even though it's low risk,
'cause they're going slowly still some issue with capsizing?
'cause that's the
Yeah. Um,
I, I'd be, you're sort
of going at really, really slow speed
and probably, you know, largely in the middle of the lake.
So I suppose technically there is, you could hit something
at slow speed in that.
Um, there's, there's very probably a slim chance in that.
But yeah, it's, uh, I mean,
the last thing you wanna do is hold your boat and that
and, uh, yeah, we, we follow the internal practice of,
you know, when we're underway for all our staff,
we're doing our compliance checks and all of that.
We always wear life jackets full on
and we, we note the previous submitters talking about
inflatable life, uh, vests
and that we sort
of opted away from those internally in our jet boats
and things because there isn't enough time
with those when you do have an incident.
So yeah. Um, we, we would like everyone to have some sort
of flotation means with them when they're on a boat.
Cool. I think Richie, I think that is all the questions.
So look, nice to see you again. Thank you for, nice
To see you. Thank you
Very much for your time and, um, keep up the good work.
Thank you. Cheers. Thank you. Right.
That takes us to jet boating New Zealand.
I think we've got Paul, is
that, is that right?
And somebody, uh,
we've got a change in Clark momentarily too.
So Who's, who's on Azi? Paul's just coming in. Yeah.
Okay, thanks. Oh, hi Paul.
Can't hear you.
Uh, Paul,
Paul, could you try saying something?
I I'm not, I can't hear anything there.
So something's not quite working.
You're not, you don't look as though you're muted.
Uh, can somebody let Cameron in too, please?
He's obviously kicked himself out.
Paul, can't hear you.
Do you want to, um, uh, Eve,
can Paul drop off and then come back on again?
You, you're, you're, you're actually down is muted.
Oh, sorry. Oh no, just saw,
saw the logo when it flashed up as full.
So if we can get it back on again, that'd be great.
Eve, if we've got Paul back hit
Yes, I can see him.
Cool. But we can't hear him.
Okay. Paul can't hear you at the moment.
Um, don't see you being muted now.
Now I do. So for some reason you've gotta mute on,
have another go.
Can you turn the volume up, see if that makes a difference,
Not, not hearing anything.
If you can see the, um, the suggestion to going go
to settings and look at the audio on your settings,
she might have that on zero
While we're, um, still can't hear a
can you hear, can you hear me?
If you gimme a thumbs up.
Yeah. Okay. Right. So audio's getting to you,
but not from, um, Paul,
what I'm gonna suggest is to, um, perhaps
to duck off again to come back again.
What we'll do is we'll just, we'll see if we can box on Eve.
Have we got the, the next submitter? Yes, we do. Okay.
What we'll do, Paul, is we'll just, we'll go
to the next submitter
and if we can get you back on, we can work with, um, Eve
to try and get the sounds issue sorted out.
We'll pop you back in at some stage in the next, uh,
next couple of submitters hopefully.
Right. We'll see you soon. Right. Okay.
Um, who's next up then? Eve?
Uh, we've got, um, uh, Catherine.
Hello? Catherine
Mute. Is that working?
That is working loud and clear.
Good. Excellent. Good afternoon.
Right. Okay, Catherine, we've got your, um, uh,
your submission, uh, can't see you,
but that's, we'll live with that.
I said it says start my video.
Okay, There we go.
Okay. We've got you down for five minutes.
Um, we take your submission as read,
but if you wanna highlight anything, please do that
and, um, uh, I'll give you a call two to go
and we'll look forward to what you've got to say. So
Good. Um,
as you'll see from my submission,
I already had a private members bill in the ballot
to indeed very much expand this, uh, work
of the young man from Hawke's Bay.
You'll see at the top of my submission, um,
unfortunately mine didn't get drawn out first
or we would be having slightly different
discussions at this moment.
Indeed, However,
um, it's still in there.
Um, so there's a couple of things that I would like
to draw your attention to
and one is the official information that, um,
maritime New Zealand produced with all the stats, um,
that I filed with my submission.
And that gives a lot of answers in there.
I would secondly, very much like to draw the attention
of the committee to the current rule, part 91,
and I sent the link in today, which, um, gives the,
gives a great description of PFDs, but also the standards
and some other information there about surfboards.
Um, if that's of, of assistance too.
One of the things that perhaps people that hasn't, um,
come forth in this particular, uh, committee hearing is
that the carriage of life jackets was only made mandatory in
2003, which in terms of legislation and,
and education is quite a short time.
Prior to that there was no, um,
there was no mandatory carriage
of life jackets or wearing at all.
So, um, that's, it's been quite hard work trying
to communicate during that 23 year period.
But the most particularly interesting thing
of all the research that's come out
and the graph is on the page of my submission,
is the Tasmanian experience
and the graph there that shows graphically
what happened when they changed to, um,
compulsory life jacket wearing six meters
and under, if you'll see
that on the second page of my submission.
So that's very important.
I, I also, um, as a mariner would like
to clarify making way
and underway, um, making way simply means
that you are un fastened, whether that's from a jetty
or on a, on a, um, trailer
or whatever it is, you are floating free in the water making
way means that you are staring a course.
So an answer to Mr.
Cosgrove from Fish
and Game, the, uh, two knots you are actually making
that's technically making way underway just means
that you're floating free once you start to drive a cloud,
uh, becomes making way.
It's very, very maritime. So, um, that's really,
We might need to look at things like that.
You'll, and there's lots of people with a lot
of gold braid who can assist you.
Um, but really I just want to affirm my concerns,
particularly as someone who travels rightly
around the country and has been involved in this arena, uh,
at the hard end since 2004.
Um, either tutoring or as a safe boating advisor
or in whatever role I've had.
So, um, happy to take questions,
Right, uh, questions, colleagues
to toggle back.
Okay. Uh, Tracy,
Thank you. Not so much
question. Can I just get you to repeat
that making way an underway
AB Absolutely, and,
and it's, it's something that comes up in every, um, class
that I teach make, um, underway means
that you are unfastened simple as that.
You're floating free making way,
you are making way on a course.
In other words, you are steering,
you are steering the vessel.
Yeah. So it's, it's pretty simple.
So if it was to say making way that would, um,
ameliorate the previous submitters concerns about
electric anchoring or electronic anchoring?
Well, I think that was a bit of a,
dare I say a red herring because he's underway.
So the life jacket should be on.
And even if you're floating free
and fishing, the life jackets need to be on.
Right. Thank you. Making way is is, um, yeah,
a maritime definition. Yeah.
I think, I think, um, Kate's, his point was
that if you are underway,
Yes, You are just sitting, there you are,
and then you're getting a fish in, um,
or doing, um, as a hopeless fisherman, um,
I make no comment That, that, that, that,
that will be a further impediment.
Yeah. Well, it, it's interesting.
I mean, I've gone from, um,
a 5-year-old in the 1950s from wearing an oil skin jacket
with life jacket with Kpop,
and I did from when I was tiny, um, um,
to wearing a auto inflator.
And really the, all this, you know,
there is a life jacket fit for every purpose
and you don't even know they're on.
So, um,
why they would be taking 'em on and off, I don't know.
And perhaps that is one of the,
the magics here is there is a life jacket
fit for every purpose or a device.
There is. There is. Right. That is very helpful.
I don't see any other, uh, questions. That's okay.
Thank you very much. I really appreciate it.
Thanks for all the information. Mm-hmm.
Pleasure. Thank you. And thanks for the committee.
Yeah, no pleasure. Thank you. Right.
Um, we've got, next up I'll go back to my toggle,
back to my agenda.
Uh, do we, do we have we got Paul back again yet?
Um, Eve not just yet, but we do have Steve. We've got Steve.
Okay. We'll go for Steve then. Steve.
Hi. The team hear
Me. Thank you. Right.
We've got your submission.
You can take that as read. Um, uh,
but if you wanna highlight anything, that'd be great.
Uh, we've got five minutes
and I'll give you a call with two to go
if you, if you're still going.
Um, yeah. And we haven't asked
any questions, so in your time.
No, just short and sweet. Ready?
Just, um, yeah, just going over what I did, did submit.
So, hi everyone.
Thanks for, um, listening to me
and, um, hear my side of things.
Um, yeah, my name's Steve Strong.
I have been with Taupo Coast Guard for over six years,
and now with Harbor Master Team here on Lake Taupo.
My submission is not from either of these entities
as I stand on my own merits and what I've seen and witnessed
and put, uh, been part of in this role of both Coast Guard
and Harbormaster, my submissions today is for said Bill
to take one step forward, um,
and make it totally mandatory for anyone
who owns a private vessel of any length.
And once underway and making way
and move, basically move in, uh,
to wear a life jacket on our lake and oceans and waterways
and everywhere else I've seen and witnessed
and aided in retrieval of our fatalities here on Lake Tao.
And why they were fatalities was, uh,
basically no life jackets.
So they could have been prevented.
And I do not want to do that again, but I probably will
because of these rules the way they are at the moment
and the mentality of said boaties and owners of jet skiers,
unless these rules and rules are
changed, we will see it again.
Um, but, um, let's put these rules in context
of saying basically we are driving a car.
These rules basically say that, um, mom
and dad really don't need to wear a seatbelt,
but their children should.
Um, so, um,
basically these rules are basically making these children
if, uh, mom and dad have an accident, basically orphans.
So let's put this back on the mom and dad on the boat.
And, um, uh, where was I?
So I've lost, lost my, um, train of thought.
We understand the analogy. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, so, um, uh, yeah, so let's put these,
um, family on the boat.
Um, we are basically saying that mom
and dad don't need to wear life
jackets, but the children do.
So basically us at Coast Guard
or Run Harbor Master will basically be saving the
children, but not the mom and dad.
So, uh, hence the strong point in basically having
this mandatory for everyone.
Um, 15 and over, just everyone.
So, um, 'cause I'd like to ask, um,
have the children ask mom
and dad basically that heartfelt
story of why did mom
and dad not wear a life jacket when they told us to?
So, um, yeah. Um, and also the boat length.
Um, we here on Lake tpo, it's mandatory six meters is
and under two wear life jackets.
So we already have that in place,
but so many boaties on our lake, um, do not do it.
And out here, as I say, we are very, um,
proactive lake and we see a lot of,
um, do's and don'ts.
We see a lot of people take chances
and especially out monitoring out on the lake.
Just got two minutes left. Yep. Thank you.
Um, I do feel that basically this six knot, uh,
six meter boats should really be every boat,
every private boat owner should wear life jackets,
depending on all, in all different sizes.
So, um, yeah, I've basically,
yeah, lost my train of thought.
Sorry. No, it's good.
I've gone away from my, my, my chat of
what I had written down, so I've got a bit embarrassed,
a bit flustered, but, um, yeah, basically I just wanna,
would like to see every boat, private boat owner, wet
and vessel wear a life jacket apart from obviously
our two tall boats.
'cause they're larger and, um, they've got more time
to get things sorted out.
But, um, yeah, everyone, um, wear a life jacket once, um,
move in on the water.
'cause time and time again, I've spoken to people on boats
and yes, they have had life jackets, some haven't.
And where are these life jackets?
They're underneath the seats that they're sat on.
So if they got into difficulty,
there's no way they will retrieve these life jackets quickly
and sufficiently enough
to get them on when the situation arises.
So, um, yeah, that, that's where I'm at.
So thank you for your time.
Thank you very much for that. Okay.
Just check to see whether there's, um, questions.
I don't see any, look, I I'm gonna ask one. Yep.
Um, which is, I was prompted by the point you make, um,
made about, um, people sitting
on their life jackets effectively.
We've got them in lock underneath them. Yes.
Um, the, the role of education in all this. Yes.
You know, we've already heard from several people that,
you know, everybody's a magnificent swimmer,
uh, but we know they're not.
Um, you know, most of us couldn't swim enough far enough
to save ourselves, et cetera.
The role of education at starting persuading people actually
that maybe this, it is a good idea
to, to wear a life jacket.
Yeah. Well, um, it, it speaks for itself.
Um, as I say, uh, I, I can't really talk on
what situations I've been in
'cause obviously, uh, the families,
I don't wanna discuss things,
but, um, the people
that we have retrieved have been wearing life jackets.
The people that we haven't have not, it, it, it's simple.
So, um, yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Look, Steve, thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. And thank you also for the work
that you've obviously done over time.
'cause you obviously saved a lot of people.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
No problem. Okay.
We have got, um, do we, do we have um, Paul Nel back yet?
Dave?
We don't just yet.
Uh, the next we have in the room is, uh,
the Marine Industry Association.
Okay. So we haven't got towering
volunteer Coast Guard yet.
Um, okay. 'cause we're actually running slightly ahead now.
Um, uh, or to to UK here. We haven't got either.
Okay. So let, well, let's get the Marine Industry
Association on, we'll jump jump a lot a bit.
Peter, welcome.
Good afternoon. Can you hear me okay?
I can hear you fine. Can't see you.
We've got you. Um, can we see you?
Yeah, Peter, if you can sort that out, that would be great.
Otherwise we'll just box on. Oh, there you go.
Can see you. Yep. Brilliant.
We've got both. Okay. Welcome
Peter. Good to have you here.
Thank you for your submission.
Um, you can take the submission as read, um,
but if you do wanna highlight
some key bits, that would be great.
Um, I'll give, give you a call. We've got 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call with four to go if, um,
if you're still going in terms of presentation.
'cause we do like to ask the odd question here or there.
So, um, your time starts, um, starts now.
Very good. Um, yeah. Thank, thank, thank you for that.
Uh, w we are supportive of the bill.
Uh, and just for other people's information, uh,
the marine industry association's been around
for over 60 years.
I've been the CEO for 29
and, um, our membership includes, uh, 520 boat builders,
boat designers, marine or operators and the like.
And part of our, um, strategic strategy
document is the promotion of safe boating
as a recreational activity.
So it certainly as part of our mandate, um,
to have our customers enjoy boating
and come back safe, uh, to land, uh, with while noting that,
um, through Maritime New Zealand surveys,
that plus on 2 million people go boating every year.
So boating is by far New Zealand's largest
recreational activity.
And a lot of people go boating.
It's sort of part of our DNA
and we were different from other countries.
Uh, there's no socioeconomic difference on the type
of people that use boats, uh, from canoes
and kayaks, stand up, paddle boards to super yachts.
Everyone in New Zealand really has an opportunity
to get out on a boat, whether it be a lake river
or the ocean or coastal harbor.
So it's certainly a, a big part
of New Zealand's um, lifestyle.
Um, we support the bill, um,
and we think that's a start for the wider education for,
for people to be a life jackets.
We support adults wearing life jackets,
but we think this bill is a good starting point, um,
to get a culture of change to actually ensuring
that at least children are wearing life jackets.
Um, just a couple of fine tuning
points have been talked about it before.
Um, but we suggest that the bill be changed to make it un
for vessels underway.
Um, and that'll avoid the situation of, um,
when people take a seven
or eight meter boat, which would be six meters in waterline,
and they stay overnight, which is often common practice.
Now these boats are with up to three, well actually up
to $500,000, uh, six meter in waterline.
And of course they stay overnight on these boats.
So, um, we don't wanna make a law that's flouted immediately
because, um, 12-year-old kids will
be sleeping overnight on the boat.
So, um, making the the bill
for vessels underway would satisfy that.
Um, the other point I've just touched on is the unusual
definition of six meters at the, uh, at the waterline.
And I don't think anyone would actually understand if you
gave them a given boat, what six meters at the waterline is.
So I'm just, I, I'll hold this up
and that just for sake of a demonstration,
the latest boating magazine,
this boat is made in Christchurch.
Um, it's a 6.9, a 6.5 meter model.
And it is actually,
when I go into the details online from the manufacturer,
it's actually 7.6 meters overall.
So you need a garage at 7.6 meters,
but it's a 6.5 meter model
and I cannot find anywhere online
from the manufacturer of what the waterline is.
So can anyone tell me what the waterline length of that is?
Where would you measure it? Uh,
there'd be different points where you'd measure it.
And if you had more people on board, um,
then the waterline would increase.
It could go over six meters.
So we think the definition of waterline is totally unknown
and, and no one would know where to measure it.
And it's not known even on the specs of a lot of boats.
So we would make reference that, uh, the vessel, uh,
six meters should relate to the overall length,
less any bowel spread
and less any stern, um,
appendages including an upward motor.
So the upward motor would be exempt, would be taken off.
And uh, if it had a bowel spread for an anchor anchor,
you'd take that off or don't count it in the length.
And then you're back to the 6.5 meters
that the manufacturer is fairly called the boat,
even though it's actually a 7.6 meters, uh, overall.
And I, I'm guessing that this boat is probably
around five meters in, um,
in waterline length if you've got a naval architect to,
um, to tell us.
So I think the reference needs to be understandable, uh,
by the users and by the enforcement agencies.
So there, there are just some,
some minor fine tuning with it.
I'd just like to also make some comment in relationship to
best practice, I think for children is
to actually have a buoyancy or a life jacket on
and not an inflatable inflatable life jacket.
Uh, we ourselves, I mean, guilty are running events
with children with, um, inflatable life jackets on
and build boat competitions.
They've been in the water, they've been rescued,
but which is sort of power for the cause.
But, uh, none of them pulled the cord.
Uh, even though given instruction, none
of them pulled the cord or could find the cord.
'cause you get the immediate amount of freight,
you're in the water, you think a ring a life
jacket and you've gotta do something.
And particularly children, um,
wouldn't necessarily understand you've gotta pull a cord.
'cause a lot of those, if they have a life
jackets are not automatic.
So certainly in our family
and our representation, we we'd have a buoyancy aid on,
so they can still still move their arms and legs
and don't have a big collar around them.
And it's called de buoyancy aid, which is
what yachting New Zealand used for, uh,
all sailboats and the like.
So again, it's a little bit difficult to get definition
of different types of life jackets.
Um, but that's just one point I wish to make.
Uh, education's very important.
I've been on the Safer Boating Forum, which is, um,
chaired by Maritime New Zealand.
I've been an inaugural member, it must be over 20 years now.
And, uh, that group is a group of all water safe sports
around boating and kayaking and the like.
And they, they support, um, life jacket wearing, um,
for vessels under six meters,
whether you're an adult or, or a child.
So I'll just make mention that I'm part of that group.
But we, we are happy with the current
proposal as a starting point.
Thank you.
Look, that's great. We've got, um, four oh minutes for,
um, questions.
So does anybody got any questions of Peter Tracy?
Thank you.
Thank you Peter. And, um, thank you for highlighting that.
Very good looking Christchurch mate.
Vote as a cont
and I always like to see, um,
you said it's a good start
and I, I don't profess to being an expert at all.
Um, and I'm enjoying hearing from people who are, um,
I do have a lingering concern about the concept of a start
and whether that, um,
could intend unintended consequences rather than just going
the full whole hog and making it universal.
Um, do you have other examples within your industry
or sector where things have kind of been phased in
and have worked perfectly well
and haven't had any kind of rebound effect
or any negative consequences to getting to a final goal
of that universality?
In regards to this area, um,
I won't get the exact timing right,
but, um, probably about 15 years ago, the rules were changed
that you had to carry a life check on
board for every person on board.
And, um, I'm estimating that prior to that, going back
to the nineties, maybe there was about 50%
compliance when it wasn't a rule.
And now through Maritime New Zealand reports,
I believe there's about 90% compliance
of boats carrying a life jacket on a board for all people.
So we've seen compliance there.
Uh, the current rule, nationwide rule is that you are
to wear a life jacket
and this skipper deems it safe to take it off.
And two points.
One I think, which hasn't been discussed,
I think it's important to have a national rule.
There are different regional authorities who've got
different rules and that really confuses
the boating community.
Uh, so one national rule that would be, would be best
and the current rule could be, uh, reinforced
with more promotion
and education that you actually, the default is
you wear a life jacket unless it's safe to take off.
So if you're gonna cross a bar,
or clearly that's a danger
and you should be wearing a life jacket.
But if you're a manel spare at Kow Island
and you're 50 meters from the shore,
you've been there all day, you're swimming in the water,
you're out of the water, then you decide
to take the dinghy to shore.
Um, that's the difficult area for compliance,
that if you're asking an adult to put on a life jacket,
they'll probably say, oh no, let's, let's not just,
let's just swim, let's just dive into the water.
Um, because then it can get, sort of, seems
to be quite farcical on some of those situations.
So you've got 2 million people using boats every year.
Um, you know, the 18 deaths on, on average
that are lost each year, um, is, is not good.
But in proportion to the number of people
that are using boats, there's a pretty good
compliance already.
Many, many different situations that are considered.
Um, so look, um, just for, um,
uh, for me, the question I just wanted to ask is, is,
is it does seem as though you wanted a
sort of nuanced approach.
We've had, you know, different, the different things
that constitute a vessel or don't constitute a vessel.
Um, you've obviously raised the issue of the what,
what the water, the measurement of the vessels are, um,
whether a, um, what sort
of flotation device is the most appropriate device, um,
you know, other standards which, which appropriately met,
um, measure or, or just determine that as well
because I mean, as you said, you,
you made the comment about, um,
buoyancy aids allowing movements of arms and legs and other
'cause There are gonna be some activities which require you
to move your arms
and legs, et cetera, to, you know,
to do whatever it is that you're doing.
How nuanced do we need to be on this?
The difficulty is, uh, for keeping it simple.
And I think that the Joe public, particularly ones
that are new to boating
and immigrants in New Zealand, probably with life jacket,
I think is the default, um, rather than having
PFDs um, or further explanation.
So it's a diff it's a difficult area, I understand that.
But when it comes down to rule enforcement
and the detail, I think it could be described
as a buoyancy, uh,
or the, a decision has to be made
with a release onto a standup paddle board, uh,
constitutes a, uh, buoyancy a the actual board itself.
I don't think it does. So I think a,
a standup paddle board is defined
as a small craft, the legislation.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um, so, so, so be it.
Um, it, it will not be easy.
Um, but the key thing is to have it simple so someone new
to boating understands what we're talking about,
But in, sorry, I'll just finish that off if it's,
but if it's not easy, if we make it simple
and then we catch a whole lot
of people in a way which wasn't intended to be caught, um,
doesn't make common sense,
that's not gonna help us very much either, is it?
No, I suppose what I'm saying is I think life jacket is
what people would mostly understand.
And as so long as the rule
of wearing a life jacket could include wearing a buoyancy,
whereas previously the word life jacket was re uh, reserved
for a, um, a life jacket
that would support if you're knocked out on the water,
it would keep your head above water with a,
whereas a water ski buoyancy eight
or a sailing buoyancy eight will not do that.
You get knocked out, you'll be floating upside
down on your face.
But, um, so that's why the word life jacket, um,
was used previously, it to actually help save your life.
Look, I think, Peter, that's very, very helpful.
Thank you. And thank you for 29 years of,
of, uh, service in that role. It's very impressive.
You welcome. Thank you. Okay. Right.
Let's see who we've got.
Um, next, uh, EEF, who's, um, have you got,
have you recovered?
Um, Mr. Vernal,
Uh, it's Jonathan here.
Just, hi Jonathan, welcome back. Thank you.
Uh, Paul Vernal had to leave,
but he'll be sending through some supporting documentation
and toga volunteer Coast Guard have canceled.
Okay. Right. So we'll be going kaka.
Okay. Right. Well let's pop them on. Thank you.
Uh, thank you Chair Foster.
We really appreciate the opportunity to speak. Sure.
So I'll just, I'll just set the time for 10 minutes.
Um, we'll give you, I'll give you a call at four, um,
four minutes to go, uh, if you're still going, um,
because we do like to ask the old questions.
So, um, in your, in your time.
Great, thank you. And I do not expect us to take long
'cause we'd prefer to answer your questions
With me is the Harbor Master from the Bay of Plenty.
John, John Peters. Um, we are speaking John, John.
We are speaking on behalf of all the regional unitary
councils around New Zealand
and they all have a harbor master function.
The key points we want to make in regards
to the submission is that any improvement is a good
improvement in terms of, uh,
improving boat safety in New Zealand.
Uh, we believe that a national rule would be more efficient
and effective and that there is national consistency.
Uh, every five years we review our bylaws
and our bylaws are focused on our local community needs
and expectations for safety.
They can be in harbors, they can be in rivers,
they can be in lakes, and our preferences
for those conversations with communities to be on
what is important to them in place.
So having a national rule on life jackets means
that we can be much more efficient and effective
and have those engagement
with our local communities on what matters to them.
John, John, over to you.
Thank you for this opportunity.
So first of all, it's good to know
that we are making some progress.
Uh, finally, I do have a few
points I'd like you to talk about.
And please, I apologize if I'm
repeating what others have said.
No, not at all. It reinforces,
One is about the fact that this is being restricted
to under 15 downing risk is an adult problem
and it's not a child compliance problem.
We see it all the time. I mean,
we can look at stats from water safety
or marital New Zealand.
You'll see majority of people who are drowning are adults.
And unfortunately my generation seems to be the most guilty.
Um, the other aspect I'm concerned about is the,
the term underway.
It's really important to have that included
because as responded, I previously,
if a vote an anchor overnight, you don't expect someone
to wear a lime jacket the whole night.
It's not practical, it doesn't make sense.
Um, the other one, which is really important for me
as harbor master is the, the length of the vessel,
which is being proposed as that waterline.
Now that changes as we've been very clearly shown.
The other aspect is from a compliance perspective,
it's very hard to determine the size of the vessel.
When you, you go in a patrol boat
and you see a boat, you can't judge the size if you're
basing it on the waterline as opposed to the length overall,
which is a standard measurement is used internationally
for big ships and all over the world
for small boats as well.
Speaking of education here in the Bay have plenty.
We are really big on that.
We have students going out
during summer periods on boat ramps.
We got signage, we got special campaigns,
we have people going to clubs, imparting these messages.
We got this beautiful book of rules, uh, which we, we spread
around the region where everything is easily explained.
But unfortunately that doesn't seem to work.
It has improved. But we do see a lot
and lot of, uh, breaches, especially this last summer.
We've seen a lot in terms of small, small craft SUVs
and small panel craft.
And it would be much easier for us to enforce these laws
if it was national
because we often have the situation where
somebody comes from a region where the law is
different to what we have.
And that's argument. I'm not aware
of it back where I come from.
This rule doesn't apply.
So having the consistency makes it much easier for us to
be able to the blind.
I think I've covered what I was concerned about.
Is there any questions?
Right. I'll just check to see if there are any questions
before I go and stick one in.
Okay. Look, I'll, I'll I'll start off then.
Um, the, the issue of length of the, of the vessel overall,
and actually it's probably a question we need to ask.
The, um, uh, the sponsor of the bill, uh,
but also officials, uh, where the six meters
of the waterline came from in the first place
and what that translates to in
an overall length of a vessel.
We, we had a submitter, uh, just a few, uh,
moments ago talking about, you know, take the,
essentially the longest list,
what the longest length what'll fit in the garage,
take off the bowel spr, take off the, uh, uh,
the outboard motor if it's got one.
Um, and that's the length of your vessel.
Um, how does six meters of the waterline translate
to something which is not at the waterline?
And why do we end up with six meters in the first place?
Funny, the question is to me, or is it to be,
Well, I, that's a que is a question.
I'm, I'm asking. I mean, do you have any idea where a
Not at all What it represents?
It all depends on the weight on the boat.
So if you go fishing and it gut, lot of fish,
you've gotta be deep on the water.
Yes. Yeah. Yes. That, that changes the waterline. So
Our, our view is, uh, as the last speaker talked about,
length should be length overall
it's defined in the maritime rules Part 40 A
and it's already defined in the maritime rules 91.
So I thought the previous speaker did very well in terms
of the illustration of that. Beautiful.
No, it was more than number
where it came from than, than anything else.
Okay. Um, look, and the other, um,
the other issue just in terms of of education,
'cause we've had a number of people talk about education
and you are suggesting that it's not really working
for you in terms of doing education.
If we do change the rules, um,
if the bill passes in in some way
or other, other, there are clearly a number of organizations
that do, um, water safety, um, education,
working together, how do we get the best possible, uh,
education program, uh,
without spending a fortune in doing it
and, and it being effective
Safety and with the local marai
and with the local ev.
So that's already happening,
but like I said, it's not enough.
We still have people out there who don't want to listen.
And if we have these rules which are consistent across the
nation, there'll be some more, uh, uh, emphasis on, on,
on compliance with these rules.
So we should do some work on designing the best possible
arrangement with all the, all the parties.
Yeah. Okay. Cool. No, thank you. Right.
Any other, any other questions, uh, colleagues?
I don't see any. So look, thank you very much both.
Oh, no, Tracy. No, thank you.
Sorry, just, just very quickly
you said that it was a good start.
Are you with adverse? Um, if the,
if it was extended to everybody
Oh, we would prefer it's extended to everybody,
which is the point John, John was raising that
unfortunately, um, there are other ages that are,
um, are dying.
So we would prefer to have it as a compulsory law for all.
Yeah.
Yeah. We'll have to seek advice on the, uh, ability
to be able to do that in terms of proceed process of course,
as you well understand being from local government Yes.
When you go and consult issues of scope. Right.
Thank you both very much and, uh, enjoy the rest of the day.
Thank you for the work you day. Thank you.
Okay, Jonathan, who have we got next up?
Because we've juggled the order a little bit. Uh,
Next up will be water safety New Zealand.
Okay, cool. Right, let's go there.
So we've got Glen there. I see
Anna, are you with water Safety New Zealand or Yes, I am
and Glen should be as well.
Right. And I can see Glen there as well. Right. Cool.
Thank you. Right, Glen and Anna, welcome.
Um, we've got your submission.
You can take that as being read.
Um, if you want
to highlight any elements, that's always great.
Uh, we'll give you four minutes.
Uh, I'll give you four minutes notice at the end just
to say we'd like to potentially ask some questions.
Um, and, um, your time starts now.
Thank you. Um, Tina Koto, Kato,
and thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
Um, coa Anna Tuto, who Chair of Water Safety New Zealand,
and with me as our chief Exec Executive Glen, um,
we appreciate the committee's time
and consideration of this important bill,
and we are here to assist you in any way, um,
and answer any questions, um, that you might have.
Um, water safety in New Zealand is the national organization
responsible for leading, coordinating,
and supporting efforts to reduce drowning
and improve water safety outcomes across RT.
Our mission is simple but vital to ensure
that everyone can enjoy our waters safely.
We work with communities, government, emergency services,
educators, iwi, and the white aquatic to drive change,
share evidence, and reduce preventable drowning deaths
where a membership organization
and our core members are surf Lifesaving, New Zealand,
coast Guard and Swimming New Zealand.
We, I know we only have a short window to speak today,
and we're very interested to hear your questions,
but first I'd just like to share a few brief thoughts
before I hand over to Glen.
Today's been a long time coming.
As you know, the bell first entered the biscuit tin almost
10 years ago, and we're generally grateful
to MP Cameron Brewer bringing it forward
because as he said in the first reading, it's long overdue.
We see this as a once in a generation opportunity,
the chance to take a bill with real promises
and strengthen it so it can meaningfully reduce drowning
deaths just as pool fencing legislation did for children
or seat belts and helmets have done
for the death tot on our roads.
So we are advocating for life jackets for all.
This is an issue our entire sector is aligned on.
You'll hear very similar messages I'm sure today from many
organizations participating in this process.
And that alignment is not by accident.
It's because we see the impacts
of preventable drownings every day.
We see the families, the communities, the first responders,
and the long tail harm caused when a simple,
sensible safety measure wasn't in place.
Strengthening the spill is, in our view,
the common sense approach.
At this point, I'd like to invite our chief executive Glenn,
to speak further about while this legislation represents a
critical moment and how together we can make a meaningful
difference to the safety of all New Zealanders
who enjoin our waters.
Now, my, let me now hand over to Glen.
Uh, uh, look, there have been a lot of great submissions,
uh, and there is a lot for you to think about,
but ultimately this is,
as Anna said about making things simpler and saving lives.
It's very important to remember
that drowning remains the biggest cause
of recreational death in New Zealand.
But nearly all drownings are preventable.
Uh, this legislation has the potential to dramatically do
that, but with changes.
So in the 10 years since the bill hit the biscuit tin,
we've lost 163 lives to drowning on boats and other crafts.
126 of those were not wearing a life jacket.
Uh, just one of them was aged under 15.
They're our family, our friends and colleagues.
Uh, the emotional burden is terrible as Anna painted.
Uh, but so is the cost of society, um,
based on ministry of Transport data.
You know, one life lost lifetime cost is around $12 million.
So strengthening the legislation, the small change
for a big emotional
and societal return, uh,
many people have made this point in your committee is, um,
responsible for matters of transport safety.
Uh, but would you have separate rules, uh, for other pieces
of transport Auckland to Christchurch,
to Wellington, to the Waikato?
Um, think of the time energy
that goes into each area coming up with maintaining
and promoting its own distinct rules.
Uh, it wouldn't work for seatbelt regulations.
Uh, it wouldn't work for cycle helmets.
Uh, it doesn't work for children's car seats.
Uh, so where similar rules are already in place,
and this has been discussed by some of the other submitters,
um, they actually work really well.
So, a real life example, the Waikato,
where the Harbor Master CERs team have been working
with similar rules since 2013.
They started off with an education approach, uh,
slowly rolled it out over a, a number of years
and then started to increase their compliance focus.
But his view and the stats prove it,
it's changed behavior dramatically, uh, in the 150 people.
They stopped, uh, uh, in the last year or so.
And, uh, only one
of those people was a child without a life jacket on.
Uh, as he said, it's the dads and granddads.
And that's exactly what a number
of the other submitters have said.
It's the adult, uh, on boats who aren't, uh,
following the rules in those places.
So look on the data analysis, uh, we have and do.
Um, an ev it tells us an average
of 12 lives could be saved every year
if everyone on recreational crafts underway or life jacket.
Uh, unfortunately last year this data modeling was a hundred
percent correct and 12 of 17 of those deaths on crafts
with people without a life jacket on.
So our question is, why wait to save lives?
You've got an opportunity
to improve the bill, make the bill stronger.
Um, it is supported as the lady who was speaking earlier by,
um, strong evidence out of Tasmania about
what the change did there.
Um, and look at a basic level,
you are three times more likely
to survive in the water if you're wearing
a properly fitted life jacket.
It is no different to wearing a seatbelt.
You don't get to choose when to take your seatbelt off.
If you think it's safe, you have to wear one.
So look, our message is simple life jacket. Save lives.
You can make recommendations
that actually make it clear and simple.
Uh, reduce confusion and misunderstanding.
You can move quickly to do so.
It's a common sense to recommend a single national rule.
People of all ages
to wear a life jacket on recreational crafts
of all sizes underway.
Remove that confusion
and bureaucracy, uh, help people change their behavior.
Uh, we urge you to seize
that once in a generation chance to do so.
Uh, thank you very much for listening to our submission.
Thank you Glen, and thank you Anna.
Um, Glen, we can't actually see you. Sorry.
We can, we can hear you but not see you.
I'm sure I should have said earlier. Um,
You can see me now,
Um, potentially.
Oh yeah, yeah. Gotcha. Now, right.
Um, we've got a pro a potential procedural issue in terms
of the scope of the bill as it as it was.
If we, if we, you know, we turn around
and say we wanna change the, the scope of it
to include everybody, um, there'll be a,
an actual justice issue, which I'm sure we'll be advised
of in terms of, um, people who might have made some missions
who haven't because they only thought it was about children.
Um, what would your view be if we said, Hmm, look,
we actually want to go out and
have another conversation about this.
Or would you prefer to pass this one
and, um, potentially come back
with another one at a later stage if that is the advice
that we end up getting?
Well, I'd say, look, it'd be interesting to see what
that advice is, but I, I would say that you should pick up
and change this one as
quickly as you can if that's possible.
I've already been 10 years. I, I, I,
I don't, don't think you're quite,
quite following what I'm saying.
Uh, because if we had a bill which was much
wider in scope, in other words,
Oh, I understand what you're saying, Everybody,
those, a lot
of other people may have made a submission for
or against it who have not
because it was about children only.
And that's the question is, would you take this burden in
the hand, get this one passed if that's where we go, um,
and then come back with another one?
Or would you say, well actually go back
and have another conversation with the community about this
bill, take, take some extra time
and see where it, see where it landed.
I think we take whatever we could get
and then we were pushing pretty hard for the next round.
Okay. Look, thank you. And look,
and the other question is just in terms of education,
the education process, you're probably the key entity more
than anybody else, I think, in the education space.
Got any, any thoughts about who needs
to be involved in the education process, whoever it is
that we're targeting, whether it's children
un undoubtedly adults as well in terms of, um, wearing, uh,
seat belts, compulsion
and, uh, advisability potentially of those two?
Well, yeah, I think luckily there are,
there are huge number of organizations that would want
to play a role, um, right up from your har your Harbor
masters, uh, who have you've been speaking to already
through your, um, boating and fishing associations.
Uh, US surf, uh, maritime,
obviously Coast Guard do follow us.
And we're all really aligned in our messaging, uh,
and, uh, all really ready and willing to help.
Uh, we may need a little bit of help to do that.
Um, some of us, uh, in the form of some funding,
but we are raring to go and look.
We've been communicating the message around life jackets
as an organization for about 76, 77 years.
Uh, and, uh, there is far more uptake than there used to be,
but I think you'd find everyone in our part
of the sector wanted to help.
So, so somebody you,
you collective would be able to pull together and do that.
So it's done in a coherent way.
Yes. Yep. I, I'm sure we'd be, be willing to do that.
Cool. Good. I can see Simon
and I think I saw Tracy as well, had a hand up.
So Simon,
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Look, I'm really interested in the role of, uh,
swimming and people being able to judge whether, um,
wearing a life jacket is necessary at the time.
It just seems like a lot
of the people have gone into the water, uh, from land, uh,
have not only not been wearing life jackets but can't swim.
What, what, while you've suggested opening up, um,
the conversation to include adults,
is it worth opening up the conversation to,
to look at whether New Zealanders are actually equipped
to live in the environment that we live in?
That's a big broad question.
Look, we, we would always say there is more work to do
on educating new is to support them to have the skills
to survive in and on around water.
Uh, and, but New Zealanders do a lot better than they used
to, uh, 10 year average drowning rates, uh, trending down.
But it's the stubborn sort of areas of the population
that we still see issues bubble up, uh,
consistently every year.
Anna, I dunno if you wanna
jump in there and add anything to that.
No, I think that's a fair comment
and I think I just wanna be quite clear, um, that, you know,
there is a difference between learning to swim
and learning the survival skills to be able to survive.
Um, they are, while, you know,
those survival skills should be the fundamentals
for learning to swim, they are slightly different.
And, uh, water safety does a lot
of work on those survival skills to make sure particularly
that our, um, new Zealanders are equipped
to survive in the situations that they need to.
Thank you. We're running ahead of, we, our time is up.
We're running ahead of time.
And Tracy, you've got some questions. So,
And only if we do have Tom, um, thank you,
um, both of you.
I think I agree with you.
My gut says that in lieu of having the final package, except
what you can get in the meantime,
but I am concerned if that causes unintended consequence.
'cause that's where our job comes into play.
Um, do life jackets end up being only for children
because only children have to wear them?
Um, therefore do we unintendedly, um, um, impact
that cohort of people that are actually at more risk
of drowning because we only make them
compulsory for children.
Um, I don't know if you've got any, any thoughts on that
or if there's any, um, research internationally
or anything like that that you can sort of dig up.
'cause those are the questions I'll be
asking through this process.
Um, I'm less concerned about
increasing the scope of the bill.
I think we should do it. Um, I'm more than happy
to open up again for submissions of people felt slighted
by the fact that they were commenting on under 15 year olds.
Um, less of a question, more of a statement,
but also a piece of homework.
If you can find any information about that potential
for unintended consequences
or if there's an iterative process, does
that set the big picture back?
That would be much appreciated.
I'm sure someone in the world would've looked at it.
So Tracy, I don't think it would set us back
because I don't think those regional councils would change
their by doors, which would still require adults in those
regions where they're under six meters
and such to actually still wear life jackets.
Mm-hmm. So I don't think you're opening up a, a one
or another.
You're simply just adding
and strengthening the current rules that are there.
And water safety has done a lot of work, um, advocating
and working alongside Harbor Masters
and the Councils to see if
for some reason this bill doesn't get strengthened,
that we can get alignment through, you know, other ways
to ensure that everyone's safe and wearing life jackets.
So you don't see, you don't see the potential for people
to still, um, carry life jackets,
but only put them on children
because children are the only ones that have to wear them.
No. Not if you've still got your HABA master out
there, you know, doing that.
Yeah. Challenging the rules and, and everything else.
And I'm, you know, I'm an advocate
and a bohi from the Waikato and Bay of Plenty,
and you'll never see a, a more, uh, great group
of Haba masters out making sure everyone knows the rules.
And I don't think that would change if, you know,
there was just a one law change.
The, the regional council wasn't gonna change their bylaws.
Okay. Thanks for that, Anna. I'll take, uh, that, um,
one last question, which I had Julianne, uh,
you put had your hand up too there.
Uh, I, I, on reflection, Mr.
Chair, I'm not sure I have a question. Um,
Okay, that's fine. We'll,
we'll le we'll leave that there.
So look, thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
And, and really thank you for the
work that you, that you do.
Um, so we, we really appreciate it.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. Thank you. See ya.
Okay. Um, Jonathan,
we've dropped a few people along the way.
I don't know if we've got any of those people back.
Who have we got next?
Sorry. We'll be going to Coast Guard next.
Okay. Okay. We've got Coast Guard. And so who else?
So your expectation is those, those that we've gone past,
um, uh, and haven't picked up so far,
towering a volunteer Coast Guard and, uh,
and obviously, um, uh, crikey.
Um,
There we Go.
Um, so, so yeah, I think we'll go
And Jeff, they drop,
they've dropped out for today, have they?
Yep. Yeah. And the remaining seminars are
all online ready to go as well.
Great. Okay, well let's rock on through.
Well, you got car, um, afternoon everybody.
Um, my name's Kako.
I'm the Chief Executive Officer for Coast Guard New Zealand.
Uh, we are here representing 2100 volunteers and,
and a hundred staff who are out there on the front lines.
Carl, sorry, sorry Carl, just,
just hold, hold five for half a take.
I'll get you 10 minutes, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
I'll get that 10 minutes started now.
I'll give you a call with four to go. Um, no worries.
Just so that you know, if we can ask some questions,
it'd be really, um, really great
and thank you in advance for the work that you do.
Alright, there you go.
Yeah, so we we're representing the 2100 over 2100 volunteers
and a hundred staff, uh, at Coast Guard, uh,
across the country, um, who are out there on a day to day,
um, doing the business.
We looked at last year, we, we responded
to 2,700 different events out on the water.
Uh, last Saturday alone,
we had over 3,900 trip reports
reported through to Coast Guard.
Um, so representing a lot of activity out there on the,
on the water, uh, coast Guard New Zealand, uh,
certainly supports the bill, um,
but feel that it does not go far enough
as per our submission.
We believe that it should be for, uh, everybody
for all size craft, uh, underway.
Uh, when we look at statistics of the people
that we are pulling outta the water, it's predominantly, uh,
older males over the age of 40 and
therefore wouldn't be captured
by this bill as that currently stance.
If we truly want to save lives, we must go further than the,
the current bill as it's presented.
And I've seen submissions around, um, um, the barriers
that there might be to that.
Um, but to put a, without having to drive into some
of the conversations that's already been had,
what I would like to do is kind of put
that humanist approach, the real, um,
what we are doing out on the water, um, to you.
And I'd like to introduce, uh, beside me, the president of,
uh, coast Guard New Zealand, uh, Bennett,
who not only is the president of President of New Zealand,
uh, but is also a volunteer, longstanding volunteer
and skipper on a Coast Guard vessel who can,
who can give us some context, uh, to
what happens if we don't, uh,
push this a little further and make this happen.
Yes. Thank you Carl,
and thank you members of the committee for this opportunity.
I've asked Carl to, uh, allow me to join him in this, uh,
sub submission, uh, to powerfully represent
the over 2000 volunteers, uh, that are out on the water, uh,
and the staff that support them, that are totally committed
to keeping people safe on,
on our waterways inland and at sea.
Um, you have already heard, uh, a great deal, uh,
from a number of other collaborators that we're working
with in terms of improving water safety.
I would like to express the human element.
There is nothing more distressing
for a volunteer who's committed to keeping people safe
and who's made themselves available to respond to incidents
often under difficult circumstances.
To arrive at the scene only to find
that the person they are there to rescue
and take home to the families has drowned
because they have not been wearing a life jacket.
This happens far too frequently,
and as you've heard, there's a large proportion of drownings
are due to people not wearing a life jacket.
In my own case, last year, my crew
and I were called to an incident of two people, a man
and a woman that had launched from Cow,
cow Bay to go fishing.
The wind was coming from behind them
so it was reasonably calm as they left shore
and their reasonably small craft.
And as they ventured further,
the wind was obviously stronger and the wave were bigger.
And eventually they tipped out.
We were called to rescue them
by someone on the opposite shore,
some two hours drifting away
that saw the woman in, in the water.
And miraculously that woman was still able to cry for help,
despite having been in the water for well over two hours.
When we arrived to pull the woman to safety
to our vessel, she let us know
that there was another person in the water,
that it was a man, that he had been in charge,
and that she had watched him flounder and drowned.
He had ensured that she wore her life jacket.
He had a life jacket on board, but chose not to wear it.
They tipped into the water, she watched him try
to recover his life jacket and put it on.
He floundered and drowned in front of her eyes
and they both drifted for two hours to shore.
Fortunately, at the very least, we were able to locate
that person just before dark
and take him home to his family.
Uh, but I can tell you there's nothing more distressing
for volunteers for all of us at Coast Guard
to see yet again.
The example of the person wearing a life jacket survived
and the person that did not perished, I don't know how.
More simply we can state the case
for not only having life jackets available,
but ensuring you're wearing one
if you find yourself unexpectedly in the water.
As car has said, this has nothing to do with age.
In fact, children are the least likely, uh, to drown.
And funnily enough, uh, we see time and time
and time again, parents who take care
to ensure their child is wearing a life jacket
and they choose not to.
And then the whole boat gets tipped in
and there's nothing even more tragic than knowing
that only the child has survived
because they're wearing a life jacket.
And the two parents have perished because they didn't.
Thank you. On that note, uh, Carlos question.
Hi. Thank you Carl. Good to see you yesterday.
Um, just, uh, I wanna follow up some
conversation from yesterday.
You mentioned to me yesterday that, um,
other country have a similar legislation have,
and there's a lot of, uh, you know, the,
the survival way have been largely, uh, increased or,
or um, do you think, can you, can you clarify
or just mention it to the committee, how those country,
the survival way or drowning waste being changed
after they changed the, uh, similar legislation
And what we saw with the likes of Victoria?
Uh, with Victoria, we saw that the rates increased from 22%
to 63% when the legislation was changed in Victoria.
Uh, another example would be, uh, Tasmania.
And I think you've heard, uh, some statistics from, uh,
water safety and safer boating, um, other entities there
where fatalities were, were drastically reduced as a result.
We know internationally this makes a difference, um,
where life jackets will on.
Um, you know, you would've heard the statistics
around the number of, uh,
bodies we've recovered from the water.
Um, this, uh, in the last 12 months
or even in the last 24 months
and we're up to, you know, 80% of those people,
if they had worn a life jacket would've been much
more likely to survive.
Um, the legislation makes a difference.
We've been educating
and advocating for prevention, for wearing life jackets,
carrying two forms of communication, all uh,
all those safety messaging for years and years and years.
We know that with legislation underpinning it,
that message may finally get home
and we won't have volunteers, uh, like Bennett
and his crew, uh, bringing, uh,
pulling bodies out of the water.
And I just got one more question chair.
If I, if I can ask, um, in your opinion,
which type of life jacket life jacket will be more suitable
for people under 10 years old?
I, I might answer that.
I think I heard, um, this asked in different ways.
Uh, how do we specify appropriate life jackets
for different use and different ages and different people?
Uh, I think the key thing is
that it needs to be fit for purpose.
And when that person or
that individual finds themselves in the water, they are able
to float and able to breathe.
Um, my advice for children, uh,
who may well not be able to
or think to inflate their own life jacket, um,
to have a buoyancy aid
or a life jacket, uh, that is already, uh, ready
to keep them floating when they enter the water.
Um, not sure what the exact age for that is,
but we need to make absolutely sure that if someone is going
to be accountable for manually inflating their life jacket,
that they are mature enough
and they enter the water in circumstances
that would make that quite likely.
Right. Uh, so, uh, you will find for example that uh,
with the recreational pursuits that are
a rising every year new things with foiling and other craft
and so on, you'll find that
recreational watercraft users
who often find themselves in the water, wind surfers
and so on, they always wear buoyancy.
It's whether it's their wetsuit
or a vest specifically designed for their sport,
they wouldn't think of not wearing one.
You know why? Because they often find themselves in the
water and know how difficult it is to survive
and manage themselves without some form of buoyancy.
Okay. So we need to just encourage people
to find the most appropriate device
that suits the recreation they are for suing
that will keep them afloat
and breathing if they enter the water.
So do you think the current draft have actually addressed
that or do you think we need to be um, draft in more detail?
I think you need to, uh, we need
to ensure the bill makes that statement.
I think it's very difficult for the bill
to get into a situation where you are defining the standards
for each device, relevant for each sport or each recreation.
Uh, that's not feasible.
You could refer to some standard,
but even that standard would need to be updated constantly
because the recreations are changing.
So I would be more interested in ensuring that you specified
what the device must enable for that person
and that they're responsible for finding something
that's will de deliver that given
what they are doing on the water.
Alright, thank you. Um,
I don't see any other questions and time is just up,
but I will ask one question of you, which is just,
so in terms of the way in which the bill is written,
what you're suggesting to us is that it is very difficult
to write into law, um,
something which says the appropriate form of, uh,
flotation device for any given activity.
'cause there's a whole range of them. Is that something
that we should better handle either by way of a standard
or by way of regulation in other which is much more flexible
and, and that the bill expects regulations to be written?
To do that,
I would say you need to describe what the device must do.
For example, if you're a very heavy person,
you need a different life jacket than
if you're a very light person.
'cause it needs more buoyancy.
So it's very important to say the device must be fit
for purpose and, uh, enable that particular individual doing
what they're doing to remain offload, preferably
with their head out of the water.
Yep. But it does vary
and it's impossible for you to, uh, for, you know, anyone
to legislate specifically what makes sense in each case.
So we wanna a flexible way of dealing with it.
Yeah, I just, um, if If you don't mind, I would like
to comment on the other question of, uh, okay,
We're still ahead of time. So
The question you asked of water safety of, uh, frankly,
um, the bill of a certain scope.
Would you rather take what you've got now Yes, yes.
And hope for further change,
or would you rather risk further conversation
and time, uh, in order to have a bill, which represents
the majority of the sub submissions, which we've heard
during, uh, during the day today?
Yes. Uh, And I have a slightly different answer, uh,
that, uh, we've had a chat about here at Coast Guard.
Um, I think you'll find the sectors very consistent
in expressing the view that it's not about age
and it's not about size of vessel, uh,
that this risk actually is much greater, uh,
with older people, uh, I mean adults, uh,
and a variety of craft.
Uh, my view is, um, that the submissions you are likely
to receive if you extend the conversation,
are gonna be largely the same, apart from perhaps, uh,
some individuals, uh, who don't want their freedom re uh,
removed, uh,
and they're exactly the individuals that we're trying
to assist the behavior change to say, well, you know what,
it's not a judgment call anymore.
It's simply the law and, uh, as we've done
with seat belts and with helmets.
So, uh, my view is depending on the timeline involved, um,
we would prefer that you, uh, use these submissions in order
to recast the bill in a scope, given that it's, uh,
been on the plate for 10 years.
Um, let's get it to the right place
and, um, take that forward.
Or if possible, if there is the ability
to put a provision in this bill to extend its scope
after consultation, IE in this bill forecast that
that will happen subject to consultation,
that would also be good.
But to leave this bill as it is
and hope that a future conversation
or a future minister might approach the next level, uh,
would concern me
because my concern is we'd be, uh, left here with the bill
that only deals with children in a certain size craft,
and we've already demonstrated that actually isn't
where the majority of risk and drownings happen.
Look, thank you. That is very helpful.
And again, but thank you for the work that you do.
We really, really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. And enjoy the rest of the day. Okay, thank you.
Uh, Jonathan, who have we got next? We got, I think we'll go
With Navigation.
Navigation. Okay. Now the,
the submission you've got on there looks like it's the same
one as we have for the, um,
Uh, good afternoon.
No, it is, it was different.
There were two different submissions,
but there were certainly,
Okay, well, we might have got the wrong
In there.
I flick through it might,
might have got the wrong thing there in front of us.
Anyway, grant, lovely to see you.
And um, so if you, if you want
to highlight any particular key issues, that'd be great.
Uh, I'll give you a call. We've got 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call with four to go, uh,
because we do like to ask the questions
and, um, the time starts now.
Love to answer them. Uh, thank you.
I should have one of my colleagues joining as well actually.
Um, but we'll see where he is.
I'll, I'll start and we'll see how we get on.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
We re represent the navigation safety special interest
Group, Harbor Masters Regional District Councils.
Uh, I'm the convener of that group.
I've been harbor master for almost nine years in Wellington
and 30 years in the sector.
I've been involved with bylaws, reviews, advisory groups,
and also the on the water education and enforcement.
And I'm a long time botie.
Um, you might notice my attire today is gonna wear the suit
jacket and decide this is actually what we're talking about.
This thing is not that big. It's not that difficult.
Um, Jim, are you there?
Okay, I possibly don't have my colleague. He indeed.
Yep, he's there. Okay. Can you hear me
Now? Yep.
Cool. Okay, carry on.
Uh, sorry about that few too many windows coming open.
Um, yeah, just to introduce myself,
I've been hard master in Northern for over 20 years.
It's one of the busiest recreational areas in New Zealand.
And, um, I lead a team managing the safety
and enforcement of the numerous bylaws.
And, um, we've updated the bylaws several
times in that period.
Okay, carry on. Okay, we, we've got four parts
of the three questions you ha had in the bill.
Um, and our request of the committee, which align
with just about everyone else's to expand the bill
to all people in, um, under six meter boat overall
while underway, um,
because we want a full,
we also would like a full review of part 91.
So we've got consistent rules around the country.
Um, Jim will talk about the life jacket section.
Yeah, so the requirement of under 15 to wear life jackets,
um, this existing rule, uh, the existing rule at the moment,
and this proposed rule doesn't actually align
with the majority of the national bylaws.
10 of the 14 regional bylaws stipulate compulsory wearing
for all persons under six meters at the moment,
and three of the remaining regions are changing to this.
So, um, the bill as it stands,
doesn't actually even reach the standard of the bylaws
that we're enforcing around the country.
Um, the difficulty with requirement
of just under fifteens is
enforcement actually quite difficult.
And how do you tell whether people are 14, 15 or 16?
It's very difficult to know.
They don't have formal ID at that age.
The driving license doesn't come into 16
and you can get into conflict
with vessel operators arguing
about the ages of their children.
Whereas if everyone wearing the life jacket,
it is quite clear and simple.
And from an enforcement point of view, the simpler the rule,
easier it is and clearer for everybody.
Um, there's no increased cost of both,
as this been talked about
before, as the life jackets already have to be carried.
Um, we've been educating on the importance
of wearing life jackets, so we need
to remove any confusion over rules
and try and strengthen the message.
Um, as few people have pointed out,
it doesn't actually match the safety concerns.
Um, the majority of people that, uh,
drown are actually not children.
They're older males of my sort of age, um,
or definitely adults, so three quarters roughly
and take a recommended, um, in several
of their investigations that it should be all ages where
not just children, um, supporting Coast Guard's point again,
that, um, children, you know,
will end up floating while they're older,
unfit parents drown in front of them.
And, um, that's not particularly a good look.
And you're also gonna set a target that, uh,
when they reach 15, they can take their life jackets off,
which isn't a good look either.
Uh, we're trying to encourage people to wear them.
So my summary really on this point is
that I can't stress strongly enough.
We really need some consistency
between the regional bylaws and the national rules.
And that's lacking at the moment
and it does cause us as Harbor Masters, a lot
of problems when we've got people not understanding the
rules around the country and them being variable
for the national rules to the bylaws grant.
Um, so in terms of terminology, um, life Jacket
or PFD PFDs cover a wide range of items.
Um, life jackets are a subset of those.
Um, other legislation talks about ps,
PFDs international standards refer to PFDs.
So that should be the wording at this level of legislation.
But we would definitely support an explanatory note
talking about life jackets
and to be honest on a lot
of the advertising life jackets makes more sense,
but in terms of high level legislation,
we believe it should be PS PFDs, um, Jim Waterline length.
Yeah, waterline length is
very straightforward for hard masters.
We've always used length.
Overall, that's the way vessels are sold.
Um, it's quite clear everyone understands, um,
what the vessel length is once you start talking about
waterline length, that can change with loading the boat, um,
speed of the boat and
how do you assess it when you come along.
Um, but, um, you know,
people advertise the cell a 6.7 meter vessel for instance,
and it's quite clear cut.
So you'd be in conflict with the bylaws again if you changed
that, that structure to you grant.
Yep. Um, this bill might have been 10 years in the making
the first proposal to make PFD wearing a rule in part 91 was
close to 20 years ago.
Um, unfortunately
because it has been perceived as a contentious issue,
it's meant the rest of part 91 hasn't been
revised in that time.
And there are other aspects that legislation is now well out
of date and falling behind regional bylaws,
and that has the effect of creating a lot more work
for councils, maritime New Zealand,
and Ministry of Transport.
So yeah, there, there's work that be improved.
We understand a full review of partner 91 is un
outside the scope of the bill.
What we would ask you to do now is what a lot
of people have asked is compulsory wearing of PFDs
for everyone noting that there are a set
of standard exemptions.
You've been asking questions about that.
And as Harbor Masters, we've been through most
of these things through public consultation over the years,
can work with Maritime New Zealand
to give you some really concise information.
Um, so PFDs for everyone
and under six meter overall length boats while they're
underway, that takes out the anomaly of,
of sleeping in a boat at Anchor.
We would also ask that as a result of this,
you could actually recommend to the Minister of Transport
that the remainder of part 91 is fully reviewed.
It should be the national standard.
It should be leading the way at the moment, it's,
it's falling behind.
Um, many councils have a requirement to call,
to have communications to call for help, uh,
that isn't in part 91 at all.
Um, yes, thank you. And we are happy to answer questions.
Thank you very much. We've got about, uh,
two and a half minutes left.
Um, so just to check, are there any questions
that any of you got? Colleagues?
Thank you. Thank you so much for your submission. Go
On. Yep. Julianne,
Um, I just wanted to ask one question of clarification.
Mostly it was extremely clear.
Um, basically if we
amend this law, if we're able to, to at least be all ages,
that would be consistent with most of the regional bylaws.
Um, but many
of the submissions have said it should also apply
to all recreational vessels and crests.
Um, so I was just wondering, you, you seem
to mention it would still, um, be under six meters.
Yeah, um, yeah.
Um, our bylaws
or most of our bylaws are referred to six meters,
um, six meters.
It's a long story. I won't go into, into, it's come
through historical reasons,
but the statistics in smaller boats, things happen faster,
they roll over, they flood.
The smaller boats, the under six meters are
where you do not have time to get your life jacket
to put it on where you need to be wearing it to work.
I think someone pointed out inflatable life jackets like
this one I've got, if you're not wearing
them, they actually sink.
Um, so yeah, under six meters
you start getting into more difficult situations.
And in general, small boats is where there's a,
there's an expectation of life jackets,
larger boats, it's a bit different.
But I guess would you agree
with the recommendation from any
of the other submitters if it were possible
to not only extend it to all ages,
but also all recreational vessels
I could chip in. Grant,
the, um, there, there's a lot
of very large vessels out there.
Um, sort of 20 meter vessels plus, I mean,
obviously there's seven, eight meters,
but a lot of these big vessels, they have very high gunnels.
They're pretty safe, very robust,
and the safety statistics don't really require that.
Um, I think there's still always a requirement from our
point of view and in the bylaws
that if you're in unsafe conditions,
bad weather crossing bars, that you wear a life jacket.
But, um, when you've got someone on a, a, you know,
18 meter vessel with high sides
and they're fishing, um, you know, we, we don't consider
that as a high risk.
And I think the requirement
and the kickback from people is probably, you know,
you haven't got the statistics behind the, the ability
to enforce it or the requirements.
So we just end up with a lot of negative feedback.
I think we're, we're safer, sort of,
we have the statistics showing
that people drown under six meter boats,
and I think that's the, the sense,
but at least the first step, you know, um, in the,
in the progress towards safer boating out there.
Uh, thank you very much. Our time is, uh, our time is up,
so I'm gonna, I am gonna call up there,
but we really appreciate it
and thank you for the work that you do.
All thank you. Thank you, thank you. Okay.
And that takes us to our final submitter,
which is the Canterbury Regional Council.
Oh, good. See There.
Hi. How are you doing? See,
I can see right now. I can
see you. Yep. Very good. Right, welcome.
And you've got some supporting, uh,
supporting team there as well?
Uh, yes, I do have a few, uh,
few people here supporting me.
Uh, so I've got, uh, my, uh, counselor John Sunol,
who's our chair of our, uh, regional delivery committee,
and I also have our Harbor master,
Tina Jackson as well. Great.
We've had a number of Harbor masters here,
which has been very good over time.
Can I just congratulate you also on your, uh, election to,
um, to the chair of, uh, thank you council.
So cool. Cool. Okay.
Um, in your hands, we've got, we've got 10 minutes.
I'll, uh, give you a call with four
to go if you're still speaking
because we'll, we'd like to ask the a few questions,
so maybe we go. Yeah,
Absolutely. Uh, thank you. Uh,
thank you chair, uh, Andy.
Um, and, and I might see you up in Ang in a couple of days
as well, because I'm up here at the moment. Highly
Likely For, for, um,
but anyway, so thank you very much for the, um,
the opportunity to speak.
And I just wanted to also say last year I met with, uh,
MP Brewer, our heart master star,
and sort of the officials ahead of the bill.
Uh, and it's really good that we've been able to speak
to him and see this bill progress through the how, um, uh,
progress to this stage as well.
I also want to acknowledge, uh, Tina Jackson
and our entire Harbor Master team here in, uh, Canterbury.
Uh, we've been dealing with an incident of a sinking, uh,
ferry, uh, in a, at the moment, so very relevant for, um,
safety of people on the ship
and, uh, boats and, and recreation.
And, um, just want to acknowledge that the, um,
there was no, uh, injuries or,
or loss of life in that incident.
And, um, and also the, the, uh, the vessel owners
or the, the captain and the, um, acknowledge the work
that they did to make sure people were safe.
Um, so by and large, the council's supportive of this bill.
Um, we wanna make sure that regulations are clear
and practical, uh, to help keep everybody
who enjoys our waterways safe.
Uh, this requires more consistency
and less opportunity for confusion across New Zealand.
Um, the statistics are clear
that all ages are at risk from drowning on
crafts six meters or less.
So in Canterbury, uh, since the year 2003 quarters
of our drownings, uh, in Canterbury have been, uh,
on crafts less than six meters we're of the age, um,
over 15, uh, the bill presents a timely opportunity
to extend mandatory use
for everybody leading into national consistency
and single definitions to create less confusion
and reduce the risk of drownings by helping New Zealanders,
uh, make the right decisions out on our water.
So we've proposed a couple of different amendments, uh,
to the way that the bill, um, was drafted in our submission,
uh, to support greater consistency and workability.
And from our experiences working with recreational users
and implementing the Canterbury navigation, uh,
navigational safety bylaw, uh, as noted in our submission,
these are to make personal flotation devices use mandatory
to everyone on recreational craft six meters
or lessen length to retain the term personal flotation
device and add an expl, um,
explanatory note in part 91, to note
that life jackets is a commonly used term, uh, that applies
to personal flotation devices as, uh, defined.
Uh, and the length, uh, should be length overall
as defined in the maritime rules.
Part 40 A that are already defined in maritime rule 91
as this is the most commonly used definition of length.
Uh, so the waterline length of small craft will,
will change, uh, reasonably significantly
as vessels are loaded
or unloaded, which could give some ambiguity about
what people would consider, uh, the length of six meters.
Uh, so the only obvious reason to utilize waterline length,
um, of a vessel is that it would increase the overall length
of vessels, which the rule would apply under,
so it would make it clearer
and more simple to define the overall length.
Maybe it's seven meters or something along those lines.
Uh, perhaps so that we don't confuse the legislation
and have people's ability
to understand it maybe differently interpretation, so
that we make sure that we get good compliance that's easier
for once you make the rules, you get good compliance.
Um, and after all, we're looking to achieve clear, sensible,
and easily understood legislation for everybody.
So what I'll do is I'll leave the, uh, the rest
of the submission as read.
Uh, but I welcome any questions,
and I am very sorry
that it is extremely muggy up in the far north,
so it's something for you
to look forward to in the next few days.
It it, it is, it is muggy as yes, definitely. It really is.
You definitely look at it as suffering.
No, I know. Okay. Um, questions, colleagues?
Okay, well I'll, I'll with,
um, a couple.
Um, so the, the things
that you'd been basically saying you haven't been suggesting
extending it to, to everybody?
No, not our
Okay. Just because
we had the issue of of, of our, of our scope,
um, and, uh, the, um, the issue
around the, um, the, by one
of the issues I was gonna ask you about is bylaws
and one advice you've had
because it's usually the law allows you to do
or requires you to do various things,
but the law doesn't look as though
as ever constrained councils
or regional councils from having
bylaws which go beyond the law.
Mm-hmm. Whereas in some parts of the law, in other,
other fields it does.
Can you just sort of walk, walk us through that.
Is, uh, Tina, are you able to give maybe a bit
of a better understanding as somebody who implements bylaws?
Um, from a compliance point of view, it might be better
for you to answer, if you can do that.
I'll, I'll do my best, I'm sure if anyone can hear me.
Thanks, Tina. You understand the question I'm saying is if
the law says, you know, walk a mile
the bylaws, Sid, walk two.
Yeah. Well, so, so with the bylaws, um,
we can add additional as long as they're not inconsistent
with the maritime rules.
So, um, we're just adding to the extent that
the maritime rules require that we have the,
have the life jackets on board,
we're just requiring an extra that they, they award.
Right. Okay. So you go beyond the law,
but provide, you're not inconsistent with it.
Yeah, and I think the point from our submission is
that if you're making, um, if you're making rules, uh,
from a legislative point of view to make them consistent so
that it's easier for, uh, there's a baseline
of compliance that can be measured.
And second question is, and then I'll go to Tracy.
Um, I mean, you obviously as,
as regional councils meet together on a regular basis.
Does it ever come up this issue of, um, you know, we,
we've all got bylaws, they're all different.
Should they be, have you ever had those conversations?
Yep. And this is why we're saying we want some national
consistency, which this,
So you've had the conversations, but you
haven't resolved it.
Ab Absolutely not every region is, um, you know what,
it's like every region has their own autonomy,
but it is, there are regional variances
in terms of different areas.
So like lakes may be different than,
than coastal areas and, and whatnot.
So we do have different regional variances in what type
of water activities may happen.
Um, but having the, the bill and,
and from what I can understand from reading the bill, um,
the national consistency approach would be really helpful.
Yeah, no. Okay, thanks. That's cool.
Um, I got Tracy and then Julianne.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair and thank you Dion Jong,
and team, thank you for your submission.
Hey, look, can I just, just a point of clarification, um,
in response to Andy's question, it says in your submission
that you do, um, support making it mandatory for everybody,
but keeping it to recreational craft six meters
or x uh, six meters or less.
Yes. Yes. Sorry, I shoulda,
That's why I was asking. Yeah,
Yeah, no, that's, that, that's great.
Thank you.
Oh, so, so sorry, Dion,
if I can, and then I'll go to Julianne.
Can I just then be clear, um, that if we were in a situation
where we had advice that we weren't able to do that
with Scope mm-hmm.
You'd be aware of that in terms of consultation processes
and so on, um, would you prefer us to take
what we've got at the moment
and get that through,
assuming that that's what we want to do?
Um, or would you say, well actually no pause, um, and go out
and consult more widely on, on, on, on a,
on legislation that actually covered all ages,
because that's a fairly sizable change in the scope.
Yeah, I think, uh, I think what we've, what
what you've delivered is, is far better than what, um, is,
is available right now.
So I think what is on, on the cards
that you've delivered within the bill is better.
Um, but as I said from our feedback
that from the enforcement point of view, having the,
the consistency in all ages, I mean all people under those,
um, under, in those crafts under six meters or,
or seven meters or potentially different, um,
ways you measure it would be better.
So would Yeah, I, I understand what you're saying.
Would you prefer us to take the, the bird in the hand,
the bill as, as is with only under for fifteens and under,
or would you prefer us to actually get so,
so actually prefer to,
I think from a personal perspective, I think the bill
as it is, is better than what we've got.
So yes, if you could, that would be great.
Um, but I think there are some improvements
that could be made from somebody
and from people who have, um, implemented these,
It may for six months, sorry,
Tracy office Essentially what we're saying.
Yeah, you get it right the first
Time. Yeah, I think get it, get it
right first time. Yeah.
Oh, now I'm getting confused.
Sorry. I mean, it's always best to get it right,
obviously, um,
but I'm just saying that what you've got
is better than what it's
Okay.
You as well, Julie,
Julianne, you had your hand up.
Uh, I mean, my question's mainly been answered.
I'd say the maj, the vast majority
of submitters we've heard from today have suggested
that we should extend that the bill should be altered
to make it mandatory for all ages.
Uh, and actually the majority seem
to be saying all recreational VE vessels, so,
but there have been a few that said six meters or under.
So just wondering, um, what, yeah, if you,
you thought six meters was good enough
or whether we should be going bigger
or all vessels just for, to simplify,
Uh, John or, uh, Tina,
do you have any input into what you might I
Can see John's got his hand up, so yeah,
If, if I could just, um, briefly state as a,
as an average, uh, boater at times, um,
and making some dumb decisions,
everyone would be the best option if we could.
Uh, you learn from your mistakes, uh,
but the mistakes if they go terribly wrong are, are fatal.
So from my perspective, if we could get it to a point, uh,
recreation boats six meters
and under everyone in a, in a, uh,
personal device would be my, uh, I guess my option.
Even if that takes a little bit longer.
Even if it took a little bit longer. Yes.
Yeah. Okay. Cool. That's helpful. Any other questions?
Tracy, is that still a hand up for a question? No. Okay.
Look, we are at time, so thank you very much.
Um, really appreciate it. Thank you.
And, um, enjoy the rest of the day
and thank you for the work you're doing. Alright,
Cheers. Cheers mate. Cheers.
Thank you.
Okay, colleagues, we that,
that's the end of the submissions, correct?
Uh, Jonathan, we've got nobody else who's popped back in.
Yep, that's correct. Brilliant.
Okay, so we now go to the private, um, uh, private session
to, um, uh, to consider, uh, ask for a departmental report.
Um, and we've also got an issue just
around talking briefly about, uh, Ford program.
So if you can get off this one
and we'll go to the private, um, the private session.